The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cicero: Letters to Atticus, Volume III (of
3), by Marcus Tullius Cicero

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Cicero: Letters to Atticus, Volume III (of 3)

Author: Marcus Tullius Cicero

Translator: E. O. Winstedt

Release Date: March 8, 2016 [EBook #51403]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS, VOL 3 ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, David Garcia and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Books project.)






                       THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY
                               EDITED BY
   E. CAPPS, PH.D., LL.D. T. E. PAGE, LITT.D. W. H. D. ROUSE, LITT.D.




                           LETTERS TO ATTICUS
                                  III




                            CICERO'S LETTERS
                              TO ATTICUS.

                               VOLUME I.
                              BOOKS I.-VI.

                               VOLUME II.
                             BOOKS VII.-XI.




                                 CICERO
                           LETTERS TO ATTICUS


                     WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
                          E. O. WINSTEDT, M.A.
                      OF MAGDALEN COLLEGE, OXFORD



                            IN THREE VOLUMES
                                  III




[Illustration]




                       LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN
                     NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
                                MCMXVIII




                              INTRODUCTION


The letters contained in this volume begin with one written just after
Caesar's final victory over the remains of the Pompeian party at Thapsus
in April, 46 B.C., and cover three of the last four years of Cicero's
life. When they open, Cicero was enjoying a restful interval after the
troublous times of the Civil War. He had made his peace with Caesar and
reconciled himself to a life of retirement and literary activity. In the
Senate he never spoke except to deliver a speech pleading for the return
from exile of his friend Marcellus; and his only other public appearance
was to advocate the cause of another friend, Ligarius. In both he was
successful; and, indeed, so he seems also to have been in private
appeals to Caesar on behalf of friends. But their relations were never
intimate,[1] and Cicero appears always to have felt ill at ease in
Caesar's society,[2] disliking and fearing him as a possible tyrant or
at least an anomaly in a Republican state. He evidently felt, too, some
natural qualms at being too much of a turn-coat, as he dissuaded his son
from joining Caesar's expedition to Spain at the end of the year on that
ground, and persuaded him to go to Athens to study instead.[3] No doubt
he considered that it was more consonant with the dignity which he was
always claiming for himself to take no part in public affairs at all
than to play a secondary part where he had once been first. Consequently
he spent the year 46 peacefully engaged in writing and in his

Footnote 1:

  XIV. 1 and 2.

Footnote 2:

  XIII. 52.

Footnote 3:

  XII. 7.

private affairs; and even of those we hear little, as he was at Rome the
greater part of the time. Somewhat under protest he wrote, apparently at
the suggestion of the Caesarian party,[4] with most of whom he was on
good terms, a work on Cato, which satisfied neither friend nor foe, as
Brutus thought it necessary to write another himself, and Caesar
composed an _Anti-Cato_. Of his other writings, two rhetorical works,
the _Brutus_ and the _Orator_, and one philosophical, the _Paradoxa_,
fall in this year. In the early part of it he divorced Terentia, and at
the end of it married his rich and youthful ward Publilia; but he soon
separated from her. The unhappy marriage between his daughter Tullia and
her profligate husband, Dolabella, was dissolved at much the same time,
but she only survived for a few months. Her death, which occurred in
February, 45 B.C., seems to have prostrated Cicero with grief, and a
long series of daily letters, from March to August of that year, are
largely filled with reiterations of his grief and projects for the
erection of a shrine in her honour. They are interesting for the light
they cast on Atticus' treatment of Cicero when he was unstrung and
excited. Atticus evidently disapproved entirely of the project; but from
Cicero's answers one infers that he kept on humouring him and at the
same time delaying action on his part by continual suggestions of a
fresh site for the shrine, knowing that Cicero's ardour would cool and
the scheme drop through, as it did.

Footnote 4:

  XII. 4.

Much is said, too, in these letters about the literary work to which
Cicero turned with more eagerness than ever to assuage his grief; and
the output was enormous. A book on consolation in times of sorrow, a
general introduction to the philosophical works which followed, the _De
Finibus_, the _Academica_—rewritten, three times[5]—and a small
rhetorical treatise, the _Partitiones Oratoriae_, were published during
the year, while the _Tusculanae Disputationes_, the _De Natura Deorum_
and the _De Senectute_ were projected and begun. Certainly Cicero was
right in saying that he had no lack of words![6]

Footnote 5:

  XIII. 13 and 16.

Footnote 6:

  XII. 52.

Of political affairs little is said; indeed, in Caesar's absence there
was not much to say. But there are occasional sneers at the honours paid
to him[7] and at his projected extension of Rome.[8] For the latter part
of the year, after Caesar's return from Spain, there are no letters in
this collection except two amusing letters in December, one describing a
conversation with his nephew, who was trying to make peace with his
relatives after a violent quarrel,[9] and the other Cicero's
entertainment of Caesar at Puteoli.[10]

Footnote 7:

  XII. 45; XIII. 27 and 44.

Footnote 8:

  XIII. 35.

Footnote 9:

  XIII. 42.

Footnote 10:

  XIII. 52.

Not long afterwards came the murder of Caesar, at which Cicero to his
regret was not present, though he was in Rome and hastened to the
Capitol to lend his support to the murderers. He found, however, the
cold Brutus hard to stir into action, and after Antony's speech at the
funeral he thought it wiser to retire from Rome. The letters written at
the time are full of rejoicing at the death of a man, towards whom he
never seems to have felt any attraction, in spite of the kindness he had
received at his hands. But he soon realised the hopelessness of the
Republican cause, which lacked both a leader and a following. He himself
regained something of his old position, and we find him not only
consulted by Brutus and the rest of his party, but politely addressed by
Antony in a note, asking his permission to recall Cicero's old enemy
Clodius.[11] Cicero, taking the request as a demand, returned an equally
polite note of assent;[12] but what he thought of the request and of
Antony is shown by a letter sent to Atticus simultaneously.[13] For a
while there are occasional bursts of hope in a revival of the old
constitution, for instance when Dolabella threw down the column erected
in the forum in honour of Caesar;[14] but despair at the inactivity of
Brutus and his friends and at Antony's growing influence and the respect
shown for Caesar's enactment after his death prevail; and Cicero
contemplated crossing to Greece to visit his son and escape from the war
he foresaw. Octavian's arrival and opposition to Antony did not comfort
him much, in spite of attentions paid to himself by the future emperor,
as he mistrusted Octavian's youth, his abilities and his intentions.
But, when just on the point of sailing, news reached him that there was
a chance of Antony giving way and peace with something of the old
conditions being restored; and he hurried back to Rome to take his part
in its restoration.[15] There he found little chance of peace, but, once
returned, he recovered sufficient courage to take the lead in the Senate
and deliver his first _Philippic_ against Antony. After that there are
only a few letters written towards the end of the year. In them he still
expresses great mistrust for Octavian, who was continually appealing to
him for his support;[16] and, in spite of his renewed entry into public
affairs, one

Footnote 11:

  XIV. 13a.

Footnote 12:

  XIV. 13b.

Footnote 13:

  XIV. 13.

Footnote 14:

  XIV. 15.

Footnote 15:

  XVI. 7.

Footnote 16:

  XVI. 9 and 11

is rather surprised to find that he was still working at his
philosophical treatises, writing the _De Officiis_ to dedicate to his
son,[17] and even eager to turn to history at the suggestion of
Atticus.[18] Such is the last glimpse we get of him in the _Letters to
Atticus_. Shortly afterwards he returned to Rome, and for some six
months led the senatorial party in its opposition to Antony; but, when
Octavian too turned against the party and the struggle became hopeless,
he retired to Tusculum, where he lived until he was proscribed by the
Triumvirs early in December. Then he contemplated flight to Greece, but
was killed at Astura before he had succeeded in leaving Italy.

Footnote 17:

  XVI. 11.

Footnote 18:

  XVI. 13b.

I must again acknowledge my indebtedness in preparing the translation to
Tyrrell's edition of the Letters and to Shuckburgh's translation, from
both of which I have "conveyed" many a phrase. The text is as usual
based on the Teubner edition, and textual notes have been mainly
confined to passages where a reading not found in that edition was
adopted. In those notes the following abbreviations are used:—

  _M_ = the _Codex Mediceus_ 49, 18, written in the year 1389 A.D.,
    and now preserved in the Laurentian Library at Florence. _M^1_
    denotes the reading of the first hand, and _M^2_ that of a
    reviser.

  Δ = the reading of _M_ when supported by that of the _Codex Urbinas_
    322, a MS. of the fifteenth century, preserved in the Vatican
    Library.

  _O_ = _Codex_ 1, 5, 34 in the University Library at Turin, written
    in the fifteenth century. _O^1_ denotes the reading of the first
    hand, and _O^2_ that of a reviser.

  _C_ = the marginal readings in Cratander's edition of 1528, drawn
    from a MS. which is lost.

  _Z_ = the readings of the lost _Codex Tornaesianus_. _Z_^b, _Z_^l,
    _Z_^t, the readings of the same MS. when attested only by Bosius,
    Lambinus, or Turnebus respectively.

  _L_ (marg.) = readings in the margin of Lambinus' second edition.

  _Vict._ = the _editio Petri Victori_ (Venice, 1534-37).




                                CONTENTS


                 Letters to Atticus Book XII  _Page_ 1

                 Letters to Atticus Book XIII      109

                 Letters to Atticus Book XIV       217

                 Letters to Atticus Book XV        293

                 Letters to Atticus Book XVI       369

                            CICERO'S LETTERS
                               TO ATTICUS
                                BOOK XII

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 2




                           M. TULLI CICERONIS
                         EPISTULARUM AD ATTICUM
                            LIBER DUODECIMUS


                                   I

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati VIII K. Dec. a. 708_]

Undecimo die, postquam a te discesseram, hoc litterularum exaravi
egrediens e villa ante lucem, atque eo die cogitabam in Anagnino,
postero autem in Tusculano, ibi unum diem; V Kalend. igitur ad
constitutum. Atque utinam continuo ad complexum meae Tulliae, ad osculum
Atticae possim currere! Quod quidem ipsum scribe, quaeso, ad me, ut, dum
consisto in Tusculano, sciam, quid garriat, sin rusticatur, quid scribat
ad te; eique interea aut scribes salutem aut nuntiabis itemque Piliae.
Et tamen, etsi continuo congressuri sumus, scribes ad me, si quid
habebis.

Cum complicarem hanc epistulam, noctuabundus ad me venit cum epistula
tua tabellarius; qua lecta de Atticae febricula scilicet valde dolui.
Reliqua, quae exspectabam, ex tuis litteris cognovi omnia; sed, quod
scribis "igniculum matutinum γεροντικόν," γεροντικώτερον est memoriola
vacillare. Ego enim IIII Kal. Axio dederam, tibi III, Quinto, quo die
venissem, id est V Kal. Hoc igitur habebis, novi nihil.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 3




                            CICERO'S LETTERS
                               TO ATTICUS
                                BOOK XII


                                   I

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, Nov. 23_, B.C. _46_]

On the eleventh day after parting from you I have scribbled these few
lines while leaving my country house before daybreak. I am thinking of
stopping to-day at my place at Anagnia, to-morrow at Tusculum and
staying there one day. On the 26th then to our tryst; and I only wish I
could run straight to the embraces of my Tullia and the lips of Attica.
What those little lips are prattling, please write and let me know,
while I am at Tusculum, or, if she is in the country, what she is
writing to you: and in the meantime pay my respects by letter or in
person to her, and to Pilia too. And all the same, though we are to meet
at once, write to me, if you have anything to say.

As I was folding up this letter, a messenger came in the night to me
with a letter of yours, and on reading it I was naturally very sorry to
hear of Attica's slight attack of fever. Everything else I was wanting
to hear, I learn from your letter. You say it is a sign of old age to
want a bit of fire in the morning: it's a worse sign of old age to be a
bit weak in your memory. I had arranged for the 27th with Axius, the
28th with you, and the 26th, the day I arrive, with Quintus. So please
count on

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 4

Quid ergo opus erat epistula? Quid, cum coram sumus et garrimus,
quicquid in buccam? Est profecto quiddam λέσχη, quae habet, etiamsi
nihil subest, collocutione ipsa suavitatem.


                                   II

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Romae ante. med. m. Apr. a. 708_]

Hic rumores tamen Murcum perisse naufragio, Asinium delatum vivum in
manus militum, L navis delatas Uticam reflatu hoc, Pompeium non
comparere nec in Balearibus omnino fuisse, ut Paciaecus adfirmat. Sed
auctor nullius rei quisquam. Habes, quae, dum tu abes, locuti sint. Ludi
interea Praeneste. Ibi Hirtius et isti omnes. Et quidem ludi dies VIII.
Quae cenae, quae deliciae! Res interea fortasse transacta est. O miros
homines! At Balbus aedificat; τί γὰρ αὐτῷ μέλει; Verum si quaeris,
homini non recta, sed voluptaria quaerenti nonne βεβίωται? Tu interea
dormis. Iam explicandum est πρόβλημα, si quid acturus es. Si quaeris,
quid putem, ego fructum[19] puto. Sed quid multa? Iam te videbo,

Footnote 19:

  fructum _MSS._: peractum _Moser_: confectum _Schütze_: eluctum
  _Ellis_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 5

that: there is no new arrangement.[20] What's the use of writing then?
What's the use of our meeting and chattering about everything that comes
into our heads? A bit of gossip is something after all, and, even if
there is nothing in our talk, the mere fact of talking together has some
charms.

Footnote 20:

  Or, as Tyrrell suggests, "There's tit for tat. I have no news."


                                   II

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Rome, April_, B.C. _46_]

All the same there are reports here that Murcus[21] has been lost at
sea, that Asinius reached shore alive to fall into the soldiers'[22]
hands, that 50 ships have been carried to Utica by this contrary wind,
that Pompey[23] is nowhere to be found and never has been in the
Baleares, as Paciaecus declares. But there is no definite authority for
any of this. That is what people have been saying while you are away.
Meanwhile there are the games at Praeneste. That's where Hirtius and all
that crew are; and there are eight days of games! Picture their dinners
and their extravagant goings on. Perhaps in the meantime the great
question has been settled. What people they are! So Balbus is building:
little he recks. But, if you ask me, is not life over and done with,
when a man begins to look for pleasure rather than duty? In the meantime
you slumber on. Now is the time the problem must be solved, if you mean
to do anything. If you ask me what I think, I think "Gather ye
roses."[24] But what's the good of going on? I shall see you at once,
and I hope you

Footnote 21:

  Statius Murcus, an officer in Caesar's army. He is mentioned again
  later in _Fam._ XII. 11, 1.

Footnote 22:

  _i.e._ soldiers of Pompey, Asinius Pollio being another adherent of
  Caesar.

Footnote 23:

  Cn. Pompeius, the eldest son of Pompey the Great.

Footnote 24:

  _Fructum_ may be the first word of some proverb; but probably the word
  is corrupt, as the sentiment seems rather at variance with that
  expressed just above.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 6

et quidem, ut spero, de via recta ad me. Simul enim et diem Tyrannioni
constituemus, et si quid aliud.


                                  III

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano III Id. Iun. a. 708_]

Unum te puto minus blandum esse quam me, et, si uterque nostrum est
aliquando adversus aliquem, inter nos certe numquam sumus. Audi igitur
me hoc ἀγοητεύτως dicentem. Ne vivam, mi Attice, si mihi non modo
Tusculanum, ubi ceteroqui sum libenter, sed μακάρων νῆσοι tanti sunt, ut
sine te sim tot dies. Quare obduretur hoc triduum, ut te quoque ponam in
eodem πάθει; quod ita est profecto. Sed velim scire, hodiene statim de
auctione, et quo die venias. Ego me interea cum libellis; ac moleste
fero Vennoni me historiam non habere. Sed tamen, ne nihil de re, nomen
illud, quod a Caesare, tres habet condiciones, aut emptionem ab hasta
(perdere malo, etsi praeter ipsam turpitudinem hoc ipsum puto esse
perdere) aut delegationem a mancipe annua die (quis erit, cui credam,
aut quando iste Metonis annus veniet?) aut

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 7

will come straight from the road to me. For we will arrange a day for
Tyrannio at the same time,[25] and anything else there is to do.

Footnote 25:

  To read a book he had written, possibly on accents. Cf. _Att._ XII. 6.


                                  III

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 11_, B.C. _46_]

You are the only person I know less given to flattery than myself, and,
if we both fall into it sometimes in the case of other people, certainly
we never use it to one another. So listen to what I am saying with all
sincerity. On my life, Atticus, I don't count even the Isles of the
Blest, let alone my place at Tusculum—though in other respects I'm
comfortable enough there—worth so long a separation from you. So let us
harden our hearts for these three days—assuming that you are affected as
I am, which I am sure is the case. But I should like to know whether you
are starting to-day[26] immediately after the auction, and on what day
you are coming. In the meantime I am buried in my books, and annoyed
that I have not got Vennonius' history. But, not to neglect business
altogether, for that debt that Caesar assigned to me[27] there are three
means I might use. I could buy the property at a public auction; but I
would rather lose it—it comes to the same thing in the end, besides the
disgrace. I might transfer my rights for a bond payable a year hence by
the buyer: but whom can I trust, and when would that "year of Meton"[28]
come? Or I

Footnote 26:

  Or, as Tyrrell and Shuckburgh, "whether you are coming to-day or, if
  not, on what day you are coming." But Cicero does not seem to have
  anticipated Atticus' arrival before three days.

Footnote 27:

  Probably a debt owed to Cicero by some proscribed Pompeian.

Footnote 28:

  Meton, an Athenian mathematician, of the beginning of the 5th century
  B.C., discovered the solar cycle of 19 years. "Meton's year" was
  proverbially used for an indefinitely long period.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 8

Vettieni condicione semissem. Σκέψαι igitur. Ac vereor, ne iste iam
auctionem nullam faciat, sed ludis factis Ἀτύπῳ[29] subsidio currat, ne
talis vir ἀλογηθῇ. Sed μελήσει. Tu Atticam, quaeso, cura et ei salutem
et Piliae Tulliae quoque verbis plurimam.

Footnote 29:

  Ἀτύπῳ _Popma_: clypo _M_: Olympo _m_.


                                   IV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano Id. Iun. a. 708_]

O gratas tuas mihi iucundasque litteras! Quid quaeris? restitutus est
mihi dies festus. Angebar enim, quod Tiro ἐνερευθέστερον te sibi esse
visum dixerat. Addam igitur, ut censes, unum diem.

Sed de Catone πρόβλημα Ἀρχιμήδειον est. Non adsequor, ut scribam, quod
tui convivae non modo libenter, sed etiam aequo animo legere possint;
quin etiam, si a sententiis eius dictis, si ab omni voluntate
consiliisque, quae de re publica habuit, recedam; ψιλῶςque velim
gravitatem constantiamque eius laudare, hoc ipsum tamen istis odiosum
ἄκουσμα sit. Sed vere laudari ille vir non potest, nisi haec ornata
sint, quod ille ea, quae nunc sunt, et futura viderit, et, ne fierent,
contenderit, et, facta ne videret, vitam reliquerit. Horum quid est,
quod Aledio probare possimus? Sed cura, obsecro, ut valeas, eamque, quam
ad omnes res adhibes, in primis ad convalescendum adhibe prudentiam.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                 Page 9

might accept Vettienus'[30] proposal and take half paid down. So look
into the matter. The fact is I am afraid Caesar may not hold any auction
now, but, as soon as his games are over, may run off to the aid of his
stammering friend,[31] not to slight so important a person. But I will
attend to the matter. Pray take care of Attica and give her and Pilia
and Tullia my kindest greetings.

Footnote 30:

  A banker (cf. _Att._ X. 5) who proposed to take over the debt, in
  return for present payment of half the sum owed.

Footnote 31:

  Balbus, if the reading is right


                                   IV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 13_, B.C. _46_]

How glad I was of your delightful letter! Why, it made my day a
red-letter day after all. For I was anxious because Tiro had said you
looked to him rather flushed. So I will stay another day, as you
suggest.

But about Cato, that would puzzle a Philadelphian lawyer. I cannot
manage to write anything that your boon companions could read, I won't
say with pleasure, but even without annoyance. If I steer clear of his
utterances in the House and of his entire political outlook and policy,
and content myself with simply eulogizing his unwavering constancy, even
that would be no pleasant hearing for them. But he is a man who cannot
properly be eulogized, unless these points are fully treated, that he
foresaw the present state of affairs, and tried to prevent it, and that
he took his own life by preference to seeing it come about. Can I win
Aledius' approval of any of that? But pray be careful of yourself and
devote the common sense you devote to other things, before all to
recovering your health.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 10


                                   V

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano in. m. Quint. a. 708_]

Quintus pater quartum vel potius millesimum nihil sapit, qui laetetur
Luperco filio et Statio, ut cernat duplici dedecore cumulatam domum.
Addo etiam Philotimum tertium. O stultitiam, nisi mea maior esset,
singularem! quod autem os in hanc rem ἔρανον a te! Fac non ad "διψῶσαν
κρήνην," sed ad Πειρήνην eum venisse, "ἄμπνευμα σεμνὸν Ἀλφειοῦ" in te
"κρήνῃ," ut scribis, haurire, in tantis suis praesertim angustiis. Ποῖ
ταῦτα ἄρα ἀποσκήψει; Sed ipse viderit.

Cato me quidem delectat, sed etiam Bassum Lucilium sua.


                                   Va

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano prid. K. Iun. a. 709_]

De Caelio tu quaeres, ut scribis; ego nihil novi. Noscenda autem est
natura, non facultas modo. De Hortensio et Verginio tu, si quid
dubitabis. Etsi, quod magis placeat, ego quantum aspicio, non facile
inveneris. Cum Mustela, quem ad modum scribis, cum venerit Crispus. Ad
Avium scripsi, ut ea, quae

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 11


                                   V

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July_, B.C. _46_]

"Quintus the elder for the fourth time"[32] or rather for the thousandth
time is a fool to rejoice in his son's new office[33] and in Statius,
that he may see a double disgrace heaped on his house. I may add
Philotimus as a third disgrace. His folly would be unparalleled, if my
own had not been greater. But what cheek of him to ask you for a
contribution towards it! Even suppose he had not come to a "fount
athirst," but to a Pirene or "the hallowed spot where Alpheus took
breath,"[34] to think of his drawing on you as his fountain, to use your
word, especially when he is in such straits! Where will such conduct
end? But that is his own look out.

Footnote 32:

  A quotation from a verse of Ennius, _Quintus pater quartum fit
  consul_, preserved in Aulus Gellius X. 1.

Footnote 33:

  Caesar had restored the ancient priestly corporation of Luperci and
  the celebration of the Lupercalia on the Palatine hill on February 15.

Footnote 34:

  From Pindar, _Nem._ 1, 1, where it is used of the Arethusa at
  Syracuse, which was popularly believed to be connected with the river
  Alpheus in the Peloponnese.

Myself I am delighted with my Cato: but then Lucilius Bassus is
delighted with his works too.


                                   Va

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 31_, B.C. _45_]

About Caelius you must make enquiries, as you say: I know nothing. But
one must get to know his character as well as his resources. If you have
any doubts about Hortensius and Verginius, look into the matter: though,
so far as I can see, you are not likely to find anything that will suit
better. Deal with Mustela as you say, when Crispus has arrived. I have
written to Avius to tell Piso all he

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 12

bene nosset de auro, Pisoni demonstraret. Tibi enim sane adsentior, et
istud nimium diu duci et omnia nunc undique contrahenda. Te quidem nihil
agere, nihil cogitare aliud, nisi quod ad me pertineat, facile
perspicio, meisque negotiis impediri cupiditatem tuam ad me veniendi.
Sed mecum esse te puto, non solum quod meam rem agis, verum etiam quod
videre videor, quo modo agas. Neque enim ulla hora tui mihi est operis
ignota.


                                   Vb

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano III aut II Id. Iun. a. 709_]

Tubulum praetorem video L. Metello, Q. Maximo consulibus. Nunc velim, P.
Scaevola, pontifex maximus, quibus consulibus tribunus pl. Equidem puto
proximis, Caepione et Pompeio; praetor enim L. Furio, Sex. Atilio. Dabis
igitur tribunatum et, si poteris, Tubulus quo crimine. Et vide, quaeso,
L. Libo, ille qui de Ser. Galba, Censorinone et Manilio an T. Quinctio,
M'. Acilio consulibus tribunus pl. fuerit. Conturbabat enim me [epitome
Bruti Fanniana][35] in Bruti epitoma Fannianorum [scripsi][35] quod erat
in extremo, idque ego secutus hunc Fannium, qui scripsit historiam,
generum esse scripseram Laeli. Sed tu me γεωμετρικῶς refelleras, te
autem nunc Brutus et

Footnote 35:

  _The words in brackets are deleted by most editors as glosses._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 13

knows about the gold: for I quite agree with you, I have delayed too
long already and must get in all I can from every source. I quite
realize that you are doing nothing and thinking of nothing except my
concerns, and that your longing to come to me is prevented by my
business. But in my imagination you are with me, not only because you
are managing my affairs, but because I seem to see how you are managing
them, for I know what you are doing in every single one of your working
hours.


                                   Vb

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 11 or 12_, B.C. _45_]

I see Tubulus was praetor in the consulship of L. Metellus and Q.
Maximus.[36] Now I should like to know when P. Scaevola the Pontifex
Maximus was tribune. I think it was in the next year, under Caepio and
Pompey, as he was praetor under L. Furius and Sex. Atilius.[37] So
please give me the date of his tribunate, and, if you can, the charge on
which Tubulus was tried.[38] Pray look and see too whether L. Libo, who
brought in the bill about Ser. Galba, was tribune in the consulship of
Censorinus and Manilius or in that of T. Quinctius and M'. Acilius.[39]
For I was confused by a passage at the end of Brutus' epitome of
Fannius' history. Following that I made Fannius, the author of the
history, son-in-law of Laelius. But you refuted me by rule and line; now
however Brutus and Fannius have refuted

Footnote 36:

  142 B.C.

Footnote 37:

  136 B.C.

Footnote 38:

  For taking a bribe, when presiding at a murder trial (Cicero, _De
  Finibus_, 2, § 54).

Footnote 39:

  150 or 149 B.C. Libo impeached Galba in 147 B.C. for selling the
  Lusitani, who had surrendered on promise of freedom, as slaves.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 14

Fannius. Ego tamen de bono auctore, Hortensio, sic acceperam, ut apud
Brutum est. Hunc igitur locum expedies.


                                   Vc

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano prid. Id. Iun. a. 708_]

Ego misi Tironem Dolabellae obviam. Is ad me Idibus revertetur. Te
exspectabo postridie. De Tullia mea tibi antiquissimum esse video, idque
ita ut sit, te vehementer rogo. Ergo ei in integro omnia; sic enim
scribis. Mihi, etsi Kalendae vitandae fuerunt Nicasionumque ἀρχέτυπα
fugienda conficiendaeque tabulae, nihil tamen tanti, ut a te abessem,
fuit. Cum Romae essem et te iam iamque visurum me putarem, cotidie tamen
horae, quibus exspectabam, longae videbantur. Scis me minime esse
blandum; itaque minus aliquanto dico, quam sentio.


                                   VI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano m. interc. post. a. 708_]

De Caelio vide, quaeso, ne quae lacuna sit in auro. Ego ista non novi.
Sed certe in collubo est detrimenti satis. Huc aurum si accedit—sed quid
loquor? Tu videbis. Habes Hegesiae genus, quod Varro laudat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 15

you. I had followed a good authority, Hortensius, for my statement in
_Brutus_.[40] So please set the matter straight.

Footnote 40:

  _Brutus_, § 101.


                                   Vc

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 12_, B.C. _46_]

I have sent Tiro to meet Dolabella. He will return on the 13th. I shall
expect you on the next day. I see you are putting Tullia before
everything, and I earnestly beg you to do so. So her dowry is untouched:
for that is what you say. For myself, though I had to avoid pay-day,[41]
to keep off the money-lenders' precious books, and make up my accounts,
there was nothing to compensate for my absence from you. When I was at
Rome and expected to see you every minute, still the hours I spent in
expecting you every day seemed long. You know I am nothing of a
flatterer, and so I rather understate my feelings.

Footnote 41:

  Interest was payable on the 1st of the month.


                                   VI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, intercalary month_,[42] B.C. _46_]

As to Caelius, please see that there is nothing lacking in the gold. I
know nothing about that. But anyhow there is loss enough in the
exchange. If there is anything wrong with the gold on the top of
that—but what's the use of my talking? You will see to it. There is a
specimen of Hegesias' style,[43] of which Varro approves. Now I come to

Footnote 42:

  Before the alteration of the calendar made by Caesar in the next year,
  two months, of 29 and 28 days respectively, were inserted between
  November and December, 46 B.C., to set the calendar right.

Footnote 43:

  Hegesias of Magnesia introduced the Asiatic school of rhetoric. Abrupt
  breaks such as that in the last sentence were one of its features.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 16

Venio ad Tyrannionem. Ain tu? verum hoc fuit, sine me? At ego quotiens,
cum essem otiosus, sine te tamen nolui? Quo modo hoc ergo lues? Uno
scilicet, si mihi librum miseris; quod ut facias, etiam atque etiam
rogo. Etsi me non magis liber ipse delectabit, quam tua admiratio
delectavit. Amo enim πάντα φιλειδήμονα teque istam tam tenuem θεωρίαν
tam valde admiratum esse gaudeo. Etsi tua quidem sunt eius modi omnia.
Scire enim vis; quo uno animus alitur. Sed, quaeso, quid ex ista acuta
et gravi refertur ad τέλος?

Sed longa oratio est, et tu occupatus es in meo fortasse aliquo negotio.
Et pro isto asso sole, quo tu abusus es in nostro pratulo, a te nitidum
solem unctumque repetemus. Sed ad prima redeo. Librum, si me amas,
mitte. Tuus est enim profecto, quoniam quidem est missus ad te.


                                  VIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano m. interc. post. a. 708_]

"Chremés, tantumne ab ré tua est otí tibi," ut etiam Oratorem legas?
Macte virtute! Mihi quidem gratum, et erit gratius, si non modo in tuis
libris, sed etiam in aliorum per librarios tuos "Aristophanem"
reposueris pro "Eupoli." Caesar autem

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 17

Tyrannio. Do you really mean it?[44] How unfair, without me! Think how
often, even when I had plenty of time, I refused without you. How are
you going to atone for your crime then? There is only one way: you must
send me the book. I earnestly entreat you to do so; though the book
itself will not delight me more than your admiration of it has. For I
love everyone who loves learning and I am glad you admired so strongly
an essay on so minute a point. But that is you all over. You want
knowledge, which is the only mental food. But please tell me what there
was in that acute and grave treatise which contributed to your _summum
bonum_.

Footnote 44:

  Atticus had read the book of Tyrannio, which was referred to in XII.
  2.

However I'm making a long story of it, and you may be busy about some of
my business. And in return for that dry basking in the sun, in which you
revelled in my meadow, I shall claim from you a richer and a warmer
glow.[45] But to return to my first point. If you love me, send me the
book: for it is yours of course, as it was sent to you.

Footnote 45:

  Cicero refers to the introduction of Atticus in his _Brutus_ (24) _in
  pratulo propter Platonis statuam_; but his meaning is not very clear.
  Probably he only means that he is expecting to enjoy Atticus'
  hospitality soon.


                                  VIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, intercalary month_, B.C. _46_]

"What, so much leisure from your own affairs"[46] that you have found
time to read the _Orator_ too. Bravo! I am pleased to hear it, and shall
be still more pleased if you will get your copyists to alter Eupolis to
Aristophanes[47] not only in your own copy but in others too. Caesar
seemed to me to be amused

Footnote 46:

  Terence, _Heaut._ 75.

Footnote 47:

  In the quotation from Aristophanes, _Ach._ 530, in _Orat._ 29.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 18

mihi irridere visus est "quaeso" illud tuum, quod erat et εὐπινὲς et
urbanum. Ita porro te sine cura esse iussit, ut mihi quidem dubitationem
omnem tolleret. Atticam doleo tam diu; sed, quoniam iam sine horrore
est, spero esse, ut volumus.


                                  VII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano m. interc. post. a. 708_]

Quae desideras, omnia scripsi in codicillis eosque Eroti dedi; breviter,
sed etiam plura, quam quaeris, in iis de Cicerone; cuius quidem
cogitationis initium tu mihi attulisti. Locutus sum cum eo
liberalissime; quod ex ipso velim, si modo tibi erit commodum,
sciscitere. Sed quid differo? Exposui te ad me detulisse, et quid vellet
et quid requireret. Velle Hispaniam, requirere liberalitatem. De
liberalitate dixi, quantum Publilius, quantum flamen Lentulus filio. De
Hispania duo attuli, primum idem quod tibi, me vereri vituperationem.
Non satis esse, si haec arma reliquissemus? etiam contraria? Deinde fore
ut angeretur, cum a fratre familiaritate et omni gratia vinceretur.
Vellem magis liberalitate uti mea quam sua libertate. Sed tamen permisi;
tibi enim intellexeram non nimis displicere. Ego etiam atque etiam
cogitabo, teque, ut idem facias, rogo. Magna res est; simplex est
manere, illud anceps. Verum videbimus.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 19

at your use of _quaeso_, as rather quaint and cockneyfied. He bade you
have no anxiety in such a way that I had no doubts left.[48] I am sorry
Attica's attack lasts so long: but, as she has lost her shivering fits
now, I hope it will be all right.

Footnote 48:

  There was a danger of Atticus' land at Buthrotum being confiscated, as
  Caesar was thinking of planting a colony there.


                                  VII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, intercalary month_, B.C. _46_]

I have scribbled a note with all you want on a tablet, and given it to
Eros—quite shortly, but more than you ask for. In it I have spoken about
my son, of whose intentions you gave me the first hint. I took a most
liberal tone with him, and, if you think it convenient, I should like
you to ask him about that. But why put it off? I pointed out that you
had told me what he wished to do and what he wanted: "he wished to go to
Spain, and wanted a liberal allowance." As for the allowance, I said I
would give him as much as Publilius or Lentulus the flamen gave their
sons. Against Spain I brought forward two arguments, the first, the one
I used to you, that I was afraid of adverse criticism: "Was it not
enough that we abandoned one side? Must we take the other?" The second
that he would be annoyed, if his cousin enjoyed Caesar's intimacy and
general goodwill more than he did. I should prefer him to make use of my
liberal offer rather than of his liberty. However I gave him permission;
for I saw you did not really dislike the idea. I shall think the matter
over carefully, and I hope you will too. It is an important point: to
stay is simple, to go risky. But we shall see.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 20

De Balbo et in codicillis scripseram et ita cogito, simul ac redierit.
Sin ille tardius, ego tamen triduum, et, quod praeterii, Dolabella etiam
mecum.


                                  VIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano m. interc. post. a. 708_]

De Cicerone multis res placet. Comes est idoneus. Sed de prima pensione
ante videamus. Adest enim dies, et ille currit. Scribe, quaeso, quid
referat Celer egisse Caesarem cum candidatis, utrum ipse in fenicularium
an in Martium campum cogitet. Et scire sane velim, numquid necesse sit
comitiis esse Romae. Nam et Piliae satis faciendum est et utique
Atticae.


                                   IX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VI K. Sext. a. 709_]

Ne ego essem his libenter atque id cotidie magis, ni esset ea causa,
quam tibi superioribus litteris scripsi. Nihil hac solitudine iucundius,
nisi paulum interpellasset Amyntae filius. Ὢ ἀπεραντολογίας ἀηδοῦς!
Cetera noli putare amabiliora fieri posse

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 21

About Balbus I have written in the tablet, and I think of doing as you
say, as soon as he comes back. If he is rather slow about it, still I
shall be three days there; and, I forgot to say, Dolabella will be with
me too.


                                  VIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, intercalary month_, B.C. _46_]

My plan for my son meets with general approval. I have found a suitable
companion.[49] But let us first see to the payment of an instalment of
Tullia's dowry. The time is near and Dolabella is in a hurry. Please
write and tell me what Celer says Caesar has settled about the
candidates, whether he thinks of going to the field of Fennel or the
field of Mars.[50] I should much like to know too whether I must come to
Rome for the elections. For I must do my duty by Pilia and anyhow by
Attica.

Footnote 49:

  Cicero wished to send him to Athens with L. Tullius Montanus.

Footnote 50:

  _i.e._ will he appoint the magistrates in Spain or let the elections
  at Rome take place? The _campus Fenicularius_ was near Tarraco.


                                   IX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, July 27_, B.C. _45_]

I should be perfectly comfortable here and become more and more so every
day, if it weren't for the reason I mentioned in my former letter.
Nothing could be pleasanter than this solitude, except for the
occasional interruptions of Amyntas' son.[51] How his chatter does bore
one! All the rest is more charming than you can imagine, the villa, the
shore,

Footnote 51:

  _i.e._ L. Marcius Philippus, jestingly referred to as Philip, king of
  Macedonia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 22

villa, litore, prospectu maris, tumulis, his rebus omnibus. Sed neque
haec digna longioribus litteris, nec erat, quod scriberem, et somnus
urgebat.


                                   X

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae V K. Sext. a. 709_]

Male mehercule de Athamante. Tuus autem dolor humanus is quidem, sed
magno opere moderandus. Consolationum autem multae viae, sed illa
rectissima: impetret ratio, quod dies impetratura est. Alexin vero
curemus, imaginem Tironis, quem aegrum Romam remisi, et, si quid habet
collis ἐπιδήμιον, ad me cum Tisameno[52] transferamus. Tota domus vacat
superior, ut scis. Hoc puto valde ad rem pertinere.

Footnote 52:

  Tisameno _Z_^b, testamento _other MSS._


                                   XI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano m. interc. post. a. 708_]

Male de Seio. Sed omnia humana tolerabilia ducenda. Ipsi enim quid
sumus, aut quam diu haec curaturi sumus? Ea videamus, quae ad nos magis
pertinent nec tamen multo, quid agamus de senatu. Et, ut ne quid
praetermittam, Caesonius ad me litteras misit Postumiam Sulpici domum ad
se venisse. De Pompei Magni filia tibi rescripsi nihil me hoc tempore
cogitare; alteram vero illam, quam tu scribis,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 23

the sea view, the hillocks and everything. But they don't deserve a
longer letter, and I have nothing else to say, and I'm very sleepy.


                                   X

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, July 28_, B.C. _45_]

I am very sorry to hear about Athamas. But your grief, though it is a
kindly weakness, should be kept well in check. There are many roads to
consolation, but this is the straightest: let reason bring about what
time is sure to bring about. Let us take care of Alexis, the living
image of Tiro, whom I have sent back to Rome ill, and, if there is any
epidemic on the hill,[53] send him to my place with Tisamenus. The whole
of the upper story is vacant as you know. This I think is an excellent
suggestion.

Footnote 53:

  Atticus' house was on the Quirinal hill.


                                   XI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, intercalary month_, B.C. _46_]

I am sorry to hear about Seius. But one has to learn to put up with all
human troubles. For what are we ourselves and how long will they be
bothering us? Let us look to a thing that is more in our power, though
not very much,—what we are to do about the Senate. And, before I forget
it, Caesonius sent me word that Sulpicius' wife Postumia had paid him a
visit. As to Pompey's daughter I answered you saying I was not thinking
of her at present. I suppose you know the other lady you

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 24

puto, nosti. Nihil vidi foedius. Sed adsum. Coram igitur.

Obsignata epistula accepi tuas. Atticae hilaritatem libenter audio.
Commotiunculis συμπάσχω.


                                  XII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae XVII K. Apr. a. 709_]

De dote tanto magis perpurga. Balbi regia condicio est delegandi. Quoquo
modo confice. Turpe est rem impeditam iacere. Insula Arpinas habere
potest germanam ἀποθέωσιν; sed vereor, ne minorem τιμὴν habere videatur
ἐκτοπισμός. Est igitur animus in hortis; quos tamen inspiciam, cum
venero.

De Epicure, ut voles; etsi μεθαρμόσομαι in posterum genus hoc
personarum. Incredibile est, quam ea quidam requirant. Ad antiquos
igitur; ἀνεμέσητον γάρ. Nihil habeo, ad te quod scribam, sed tamen
institui cotidie mittere, ut eliciam tuas litteras, non quo aliquid ex
iis exspectem, sed nescio quo modo tamen exspecto. Quare, sive habes
quid sive nil habes, scribe tamen aliquid teque cura.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 25

write about. The ugliest thing I ever saw. But I am coming to town at
once: so we will discuss it together.

When I had sealed this letter I received yours. I am very glad to hear
Attica is so cheerful; and I'm grieved about the slight indisposition.


                                  XII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 16_, B.C. _45_]

With regard to the dowry make all the more effort to clear the business
up. To make over the debt to Balbus is a high-handed proceeding.[54] Get
it settled anyhow. It is disgraceful to let the thing hang fire. The
island at Arpinum would be an excellent place for a shrine, but I'm
afraid it's too far out of the way to convey much honour. So my mind is
set on the garden: however I'll have a look at it, when I arrive.

Footnote 54:

  The first sentence refers to the repayment of Tullia's dowry; the
  second to Cicero's debt to his divorced wife. This Terentia had made
  over to Balbus in order to enforce payment quicker. The shrine
  mentioned below was intended to be in honour of Tullia.

About Epicurus you shall have your way:[55] but in the future I shall
change my plan as regards the persons in my dialogues. You'd never
believe how eager some people are for a place. So I shall confine myself
to the ancients: that avoids invidious distinctions. I have nothing to
say; but I've made up my mind to write every day to draw letters from
you, not that there is anything I expect from them, still somehow or
other I do expect something. So whether you have any news or not, anyhow
write something; and take care of yourself.

Footnote 55:

  Apparently Atticus had asked to have the Epicurean view in the _De
  Finibus_ put in the mouth of some friend of his.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 26


                                  XIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae Non. Mart. a. 709_]

Commovet me Attica; etsi adsentior Cratero. Bruti litterae scriptae et
prudenter et amice multas mihi tamen lacrimas attulerunt. Me haec
solitudo minus stimulat quam ista celebritas. Te unum desidero; sed
litteris non difficilius utor, quam si domi essem. Ardor tamen ille idem
urget et manet, non mehercule indulgente me, sed tamen repugnante.

Quod scribis de Appuleio, nihil puto opus esse tua contentione, nec
Balbo et Oppio; quibus quidem ille receperat mihique etiam iusserat
nuntiari se molestum omnino non futurum. Sed cura, ut excuser morbi
causa in dies singulos. Laenas hoc receperat. Prende C. Septimium, L.
Statilium. Denique nemo negabit se iuraturum, quem rogaris. Quod si erit
durius, veniam et ipse perpetuum morbum iurabo. Cum enim mihi carendum
sit conviviis, malo id lege videri facere quam dolore. Cocceium velim
appelles. Quod enim dixerat, non facit. Ego autem volo aliquod emere
latibulum et perfugium doloris mei.


                                  XIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VIII Id. Mart. a. 709_]

De me excusando apud Appuleium dederam ad te pridie litteras. Nihil esse
negotii arbitror. Quemcumque appellaris, nemo negabit. Sed Septimium

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 27


                                  XIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 7_, B.C. _45_]

I am upset about Attica, though I agree with Craterus. Brutus' letter,
though full of wise saws and friendliness, drew from me many tears. This
solitude stirs my grief less than your crowded city. You are the only
person I miss; but I find no more difficulty about my literary work than
if I were at home. Still the old anguish oppresses me and will not leave
me, though I give you my word I do not give way to it, but fight against
it.

As to what you say about Appuleius, I don't think you need exert
yourself, or trouble Balbus and Oppius. He has promised them and told
them to let me know that he will not bother me at all. But take care
that my plea of ill-health is put in every day. Laenas promised to
certify. Add C. Septimius, and L. Statilius. Indeed anyone you ask will
pass his word for it. But if there is any difficulty, I will come and
swear myself to chronic ill-health. Since I am going to miss the
banquets,[56] I would rather seem to do so according to the rules than
on account of grief. Please dun Cocceius. He hasn't fulfilled his
promise: and I am wanting to buy a hiding-place and a refuge for my
sorrow.

Footnote 56:

  Apparently an augur had to bring evidence of ill-health attested by
  three other augurs to escape attendance on regular meetings and
  inaugural banquets.


                                  XIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 8_, B.C. _45_]

I wrote to you yesterday about offering my excuses to Appuleius. I don't
think there will be any bother. Any one you apply to is sure not to

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 28

vide et Laenatem et Statilium; tribus enim opus est. Sed mihi Laenas
totum receperat.

Quod scribis a Iunio te appellatum, omnino Cornificius locuples est; sed
tamen scire velim, quando dicar spopondisse et pro patre anne pro filio.
Neque eo minus, ut scribis, procuratores Cornifici et Appuleium
praediatorem videbis.

Quod me ab hoc maerore recreari vis, facis ut omnia; sed me mihi non
defuisse tu testis es. Nihil enim de maerore minuendo scriptum ab ullo
est, quod ego non domi tuae legerim. Sed omnem consolationem vincit
dolor. Quin etiam feci quod profecto ante me nemo, ut ipse me per
litteras consolarer. Quem librum ad te mittam, si descripserint
librarii. Adfirmo tibi nullam consolationem esse talem. Totos dies
scribo, non quo proficiam quid, sed tantisper impedior; non equidem
satis (vis enim urget), sed relaxor tamen omnique vi nitor non ad
animum, sed ad vultum ipsum, si queam, reficiendum, idque faciens
interdum mihi peccare videor, interdum peccaturus esse, nisi faciam.
Solitudo aliquid adiuvat, sed multo plus proficeret, si tu tamen
interesses. Quae mihi una causa est hinc discedendi; nam pro malis recte
habebat. Quamquam id ipsum doleo. Non enim iam in me idem esse poteris.
Perierunt illa, quae amabas.

De Bruti ad me litteris scripsi ad te antea. Prudenter

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 29

refuse. But see Septimius, Laenas and Statilius. There must be three.
However Laenas undertook the whole matter for me.

You say you have been dunned by Junius. Well anyhow Cornificius is rich
enough to pay: but I should like to know when they say I went bail for
him, and whether it was for the father or the son. Still for all that,
do as you say, and see Cornificius' agents and Appuleius the estate
agent.

You are as kind as usual in wishing that I could get some relief from my
grief; but you can bear witness that it is no fault of mine. For every
word that has been written by anyone on the subject of assuaging grief I
read at your house. But my sorrow is beyond any consolation. Why, I have
done what no one has ever done before, tried to console myself by
writing a book. I will send it to you as soon as it is copied out. I
assure you no other consolation equals it. I write the whole day long,
not that it does any good, but it acts as a temporary check: not very
much of that, for the violence of my grief is too strong; but still I
get some relief and try with all my might to attain some composure of
countenance, if not of mind. In so doing sometimes I think I am doing
wrong, and sometimes that I should be doing wrong, if I were not to do
it. Solitude helps a little, but it would have much more effect, if you
at any rate could be with me: and that is my only reason for leaving,
for the place is as right as any could be under the circumstances.
However even the idea of seeing you upsets me: for now you can never
feel the same towards me. I have lost all you used to love.

I have mentioned Brutus' letter to me before:

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 30

scriptae, sed nihil, quod me adiuvarent. Quod ad te scripsit, id vellem,
ut ipse adesset. Certe aliquid, quoniam me tam valde amat, adiuvaret.
Quodsi quid scies, scribas ad me velim, maxime autem, Pansa quando. De
Attica doleo, credo tamen Cratero. Piliam angi veta. Satis est maerere
pro omnibus.


                                   XV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VII Id. Mart. a. 709_]

Apud Appuleium, quoniam in perpetuum non placet, in dies ut excuser,
videbis. In hac solitudine careo omnium colloquio, cumque mane me in
silvam abstrusi densam et asperam, non exeo inde ante vesperum. Secundum
te nihil est mihi amicius solitudine. In ea mihi omnis sermo est cum
litteris. Eum tamen interpellat fletus; cui repugno, quoad possum, sed
adhuc pares non sumus. Bruto, ut suades, rescribam. Eas litteras cras
habebis. Cum erit, cui des, dabis.


                                  XVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VI Id. Mart. a. 709_]

Te tuis negotiis relictis nolo ad me venire, ego potius accedam, si
diutius impediere. Etsi ne discessissem quidem e conspectu tuo, nisi me
plane nihil ulla res adiuvaret. Quodsi esset aliquod levamen, id

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 31

it was full of wise saws, but nothing that could help me. To you he
wrote asking if I should like his company. Yes, it would do me some
good, as he has so great an affection for me. If you have any news,
please write and let me know, especially when Pansa is going.[57] I am
sorry about Attica, but I believe Craterus. Tell Pilia not to worry: my
sorrow is enough for all.

Footnote 57:

  To his province in Cisalpine Gaul.


                                   XV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 9_, B.C. _45_]

See that my excuses are paid to Appuleius every day, since you do not
approve of one general excuse. In this solitude I don't speak to a soul.
In the morning I hide myself in a dense and wild wood, and I don't come
out till the evening. After you I have not a greater friend than
solitude. In it my only converse is with books, though tears interrupt
it. I fight against them as much as I can: but as yet I am not equal to
the struggle. I will answer Brutus as you suggest. You shall have the
letter to-morrow. Give it to a messenger, when you have one.


                                  XVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 10_, B.C. _45_]

I do not wish you to neglect your business to come to me. I would rather
go to you, if you are delayed any longer. However I should never even
have come out of sight of you, if it were not that I absolutely could
not get relief from anything. If there were any alleviation for my
sorrow, it would

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 32

esset in te uno, et, cum primum ab aliquo poterit esse, a te erit. Nunc
tamen ipsum sine te esse non possum. Sed nec tuae domi probabatur, nec
meae poteram, nec, si propius essem uspiam, tecum tamen essem. Idem enim
te impediret, quo minus mecum esses, quod nunc etiam impedit. Mihi nihil
adhuc aptius fuit hac solitudine; quam vereor ne Philippus tollat. Heri
enim vesperi venerat. Me scriptio et litterae non leniunt, sed
obturbant.


                                  XVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae IV Id. Mart. a. 709_]

Marcianus ad me scripsit me excusatum esse apud Appuleium a Laterense,
Nasone, Laenate, Torquato, Strabone. Iis velim meo nomine reddendas
litteras cures gratum mihi eos fecisse. Quod pro Cornificio me abhinc
amplius annis XXV spopondisse dicit Flavius, etsi reus locuples est et
Appuleius praediator liberalis, tamen velim des operam, ut investiges ex
consponsorum tabulis, sitne ita (mihi enim ante aedilitatem meam nihil
erat cum Cornificio. Potest tamen fieri; sed scire certum velim), et
appelles procuratores, si tibi videtur. Quamquam quid ad me? Verum
tamen. Pansae profectionem scribes, cum scies. Atticam salvere iube et
eam cura, obsecro, diligenter. Piliae salutem.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 33

be in you alone, and, as soon as any will be possible from anyone, it
will come from you. Yet at this very moment I cannot bear your absence.
But it did not seem right to stay in your house and I could not stay at
my own house; and, if I stayed somewhere nearer, still I should not be
with you, for you would be prevented from being with me by the same
reason that you are now. For myself, this solitude has suited me better
than anything so far, though I am afraid Philippus will destroy it. He
came yesterday evening. Writing and reading do not soften my feelings,
they only distract them.


                                  XVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 12_, B.C. _45_]

Marcianus has written to tell me that my excuses were made with
Appuleius by Laterensis, Naso, Laenas, Torquatus and Strabo. Please send
them a letter on my behalf, thanking them for what they have done. As
for what Flavius says, that more than 25 years ago I went bail for
Cornificius, though the defendant is well off, and Appuleius is a
respectable estate agent, I should be glad, if you would verify the
truth of that statement from the account books of the other sureties;
for before my aedileship I had no dealings with Cornificius. It may be
so: but I should like to know for certain. And please demand payment
from his agents, if you think it right. However it's of no importance:
but still—. Let me know when Pansa departs, when you know yourself. Pay
my respects to Attica, and pray look after her well. Greet Pilia for me.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 34


                                 XVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae V Id. Mart. a. 709_]

Dum recordationes fugio, quae quasi morsu quodam dolorem efficiunt,
refugio ad te admonendum. Quod velim mihi ignoscas, cuicuimodi est.
Etenim habeo non nullos ex iis, quos nunc lectito auctores, qui dicant
fieri id oportere, quod saepe tecum egi et quod a te approbari volo, de
fano illo dico, de quo tantum, quantum me amas, velim cogites. Equidem
neque de genere dubito (placet enim mihi Cluati) neque de re (statutum
est enim), de loco non numquam. Velim igitur cogites. Ego, quantum his
temporibus tam eruditis fieri potuerit, profecto illam consecrabo omni
genere monimentorum ab omnium ingeniis sumptorum et Graecorum et
Latinorum. Quae res forsitan sit refricatura vulnus meum. Sed iam quasi
voto quodam et promisso me teneri puto, longumque illud tempus, cum non
ero, magis me movet quam hoc exiguum, quod mihi tamen nimium longum
videtur. Habeo enim nihil temptatis rebus omnibus, in quo acquiescam.
Nam, dum illud tractabam, de quo ad te ante scripsi, quasi fovebam
dolores meos; nunc omnia respuo nec quicquam habeo tolerabilius quam
solitudinem; quam, quod eram veritus, non obturbavit Philippus. Nam, ut
heri me salutavit, statim Romam profectus est.

Epistulam, quam ad Brutum, ut tibi placuerat, scripsi, misi ad te.
Curabis cum tua perferendam.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 35


                                 XVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 11_, B.C. _45_]

In trying to escape from the painful sting of recollection I take refuge
in recalling something to your memory. Whatever you think of it, please
pardon me. The fact is I find that some of the authors over whom I am
poring now, consider appropriate the very thing that I have often
discussed with you, and I hope you approve of it. I mean the shrine.
Please give it all the attention your affection for me dictates. For my
part I have no doubt about the design (I like Cluatius' design), nor
about the erection (on that I am quite determined); but I have some
doubts about the place. So please consider it. I shall use all the
opportunities of this enlightened age to consecrate her memory by every
kind of memorial borrowed from the genius of all the masters, Greek and
Latin. Perhaps it will only gall my wound: but I consider myself pledged
by a kind of vow or promise; and I am more concerned about the long
ages, when I shall not be here, than about my short day, which, short
though it is, seems all too long to me. I have tried everything and find
nothing that gives me rest. For, while I was engaged on the essay I
mentioned before, I was to some extent fostering my grief. Now I reject
everything and find nothing more tolerable than solitude. Philippus has
not disturbed it as I feared: for after paying me a visit yesterday he
returned at once to Rome.

I have sent you the letter I have written at your suggestion to Brutus.
Please have it delivered with your own. However I have sent you a copy
of it,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 36

Eius tamen misi ad te exemplum, ut, si minus placeret, ne mitteres.

Domestica quod ais ordine administrari, scribes, quae sint ea. Quaedam
enim exspecto. Cocceius vide ne frustretur. Nam, Libo quod pollicetur,
ut Eros scribit, non incertum puto. De sorte mea Sulpicio confido et
Egnatio scilicet. De Appuleio quid est quod labores, cum sit excusatio
facilis?

Tibi ad me venire, ut ostendis, vide ne non sit facile. Est enim longum
iter, discedentemque te, quod celeriter tibi erit fortasse faciendum,
non sine magno dolore dimittam. Sed omnia, ut voles. Ego enim, quicquid
feceris, id cum recte turn etiam mea causa factum putabo.


                                 XVIIIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae III Id. Mart. a. 709_]

Heri, cum ex aliorum litteris cognovissem de Antoni adventu, admiratus
sum nihil esse in tuis. Sed erant pridie fortasse scriptae quam datae.
Neque ista quidem curo; sed tamen opinor propter praedes suos
accucurrisse.

Quod scribis Terentiam de obsignatoribus mei testamenti loqui, primum
tibi persuade me istaec non curare neque esse quicquam aut parvae curae
aut novae loci. Sed tamen quid simile? Illa eos non

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 37

so that, if you don't approve of it, you may not send it.

You say my private affairs are being properly managed. Write and tell me
what they are; for there are some things I am expecting to hear about.
See that Cocceius does not disappoint me: for I count Libo's promise, of
which Eros writes, as trustworthy. My capital of course I leave in
Sulpicius' and Egnatius' hands. Why trouble yourself about Appuleius,
when my excuse is so easily made?

About coming to me as you suggest, take care not to inconvenience
yourself. It is a long way, and it will cost me many a pang to let you
go again, when you want to go, which may happen very quickly. But just
as you please. Whatever you do, I shall count it right and know you have
done it for my sake.


                                 XVIIIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 13_, B.C. _45_]

When I learned yesterday from other people's letters of Antony's arrival
I wondered there was nothing in yours. But perhaps it was written a day
earlier than it was dated. It does not matter a bit to me; but I suppose
he has rushed back to save his sureties.[58]

Footnote 58:

  Antony had bought Pompey's confiscated property, but had not paid for
  it, and his sureties were in danger of an execution on their property.
  Hence he returned in haste from Narbo, whither he had gone on his way
  to joining Caesar in Spain. Cf. the second _Philippic_, 76, 77.

You say Terentia is talking about the witnesses to my will. In the first
place bear in mind that I am not troubling my head about those things,
and this is no time for any new or unimportant business. But anyhow are
the two cases parallel? She did

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 38

adhibuit, quos existimavit quaesituros, nisi scissent, quid esset. Num
id etiam mihi periculi fuit? Sed tamen faciat illa quod ego. Dabo meum
testamentum legendum, cui voluerit; intelleget non potuisse
honorificentius a me fieri de nepote, quam fecerim. Nam, quod non
advocavi ad obsignandum, primum mihi non venit in mentem, deinde ea re
non venit, quia nihil attinuit. Tute scis, si modo meministi, me tibi
tum dixisse, ut de tuis aliquos adduceres. Quid enim opus erat multis?
Equidem domesticos iusseram. Tum tibi placuit, ut mitterem ad Silium.
Inde est natum, ut ad Publilium; sed necesse neutrum fuit. Hoc tu
tractabis, ut tibi videbitur.


                                  XIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae prid. Id. Mart. a. 709_]

Est his quidem locus amoenus et in mari ipso, qui et Antio et Circeiis
aspici possit; sed ineunda nobis ratio est, quem ad modum in omni
mutatione dominorum, quae innumerabiles fieri possunt in infinita
posteritate, si modo haec stabunt, illud quasi consecratum remanere
possit. Equidem iam nihil egeo vectigalibus et parvo contentus esse
possum. Cogito interdum trans Tiberim hortos aliquos parare et quidem ob
hanc causam maxime: nihil enim video, quod tam celebre esse possit. Sed
quos, coram videbimus, ita tamen, ut hac aestate fanum absolutum sit. Tu
tamen cum Apella Chio confice de columnis.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 39

not invite anyone she thought would ask questions, if they did not know
the contents of the will. Was I likely to be afraid of anything of the
kind? However let her do what I do. I will hand over my will to anyone
she likes, to read. She will find I could not have treated my grandson
more handsomely than I have. As to my not calling certain people as
witnesses, in the first place it never entered my mind, and in the
second the reason why it never entered it, was because it was of no
importance. You know, if you remember, that I told you to bring some of
your friends. What need was there of many? I had asked members of my
household. Then you thought I ought to send for Silius. Hence it came
about that I sent for Publilius. But neither of them was necessary.
Manage the point as you think fit.


                                  XIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 14_, B.C. _45_]

This is certainly a delightful place, right on the sea and within sight
of Antium and Circeii. But we must remember how it may change hands an
infinite number of times in the countless years to come, if our empire
last, and must arrange that that shrine may remain as consecrated
ground. For my part I don't want a large income now and can be contented
with little. I think at times of buying some gardens across the Tiber,
especially for this reason: I don't see any other place that can be so
much frequented. But what gardens, we will consider together; provided
only that the shrine must be completed this summer. However settle with
Apella of Chios about the columns.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 40

De Cocceio et Libone quae scribis, approbo, maxime quod de iudicatu meo.
De sponsu si quid perspexeris, et tamen quid procuratores Cornifici
dicant, velim scire, ita ut in ea re te, cum tam occupatus sis, non
multum operae velim ponere. De Antonio Balbus quoque ad me cum Oppio
conscripsit, idque tibi placuisse, ne perturbarer. Illis egi gratias. Te
tamen, ut iam ante ad te scripsi, scire volo me neque isto nuntio esse
perturbatum nec iam ullo perturbatum iri. Pansa si hodie, ut putabas,
profectus est, posthac iam incipito scribere ad me, de Bruti adventu
quid exspectes, id est quos ad dies. Id, si scies, ubi iam sit, facile
coniectura adsequere.

Quod ad Tironem de Terentia scribis, obsecro te, mi Attice, suscipe
totum negotium. Vides et officium agi meum quoddam, cui tu es conscius,
et, ut non nulli putant, Ciceronis rem. Me quidem id multo magis movet,
quod mihi est et sanctius et antiquius, praesertim cum hoc alterum neque
sincerum neque firmum putem fore.


                                   XX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae Id. Mart. a. 709_]

Nondum videris perspicere, quam me nec Antonius commoverit, nec quicquam
iam eius modi possit commovere. De Terentia autem scripsi ad te eis
litteris, quas dederam pridie. Quod me hortaris idque a ceteris
desiderari scribis, ut dissimulem me tam

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 41

What you say about Cocceius and Libo I approve, especially as regards my
serving on juries. If you have ascertained anything about my guarantee,
I should like to know, and anyhow, what Cornificius' agents say, though
I don't want you to take much trouble about the matter, when you are so
busy. About Antony, Balbus and Oppius too have written to me saying you
wished them to write, to save me from anxiety. I have thanked them. I
should wish you to know however, as I have said before, that I was not
disturbed at that news and shall never be disturbed at any again. If
Pansa has set out to-day, as you thought, henceforth begin to tell me in
your letters what you expect about Brutus' return, I mean about what
day. That you can easily guess, if you know where he is at the time of
writing.

As regards your letter to Tiro about Terentia, I beg you, Atticus, to
undertake the whole matter. You see there is a question of my duty
concerned, and you know all about that: besides, some think there is my
son's interest. With me it is the first point that weighs most, as being
the more sacred and the more important: especially as I don't think she
is either sincere or reliable about the second.


                                   XX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 15_, B.C. _45_]

You don't seem yet to see how little Antony disturbed me nor how little
anything of that kind ever can disturb me now. About Terentia I wrote to
you in the letter I sent yesterday. You exhort me and you say others
want me to hide the depth of

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 42

graviter dolere, possumne magis, quam quod totos dies consume in
litteris? Quod etsi non dissimulationis, sed potius leniendi et sanandi
animi causa facio, tamen, si mihi minus proficio, simulationi certe
facio satis.

Minus multa ad te scripsi, quod exspectabam tuas litteras ad eas, quas
pridie dederam. Exspectabam autem maxime de fano, non nihil etiam de
Terentia. Velim me facias certiorem proximis litteris, Cn. Caepio,
Serviliae Claudi pater, vivone patre suo naufragio perierit an mortuo,
item Rutilia vivone C. Cotta, filio suo, mortua sit an mortuo. Pertinent
ad eum librum, quem de luctu minuendo scripsimus.


                                  XXI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae XVI K. Apr. a. 709_]

Legi Bruti epistulam eamque tibi remisi sane non prudenter rescriptam ad
ea, quae requisieras. Sed ipse viderit. Quamquam illud turpiter ignorat.
Catonem primum sententiam putat de animadversione dixisse, quam omnes
ante dixerant praeter Caesarem, et, cum ipsius Caesaris tam severa
fuerit, qui tum praetorio loco dixerit, consularium putat leniores
fuisse, Catuli, Servili, Lucullorum, Curionis, Torquati, Lepidi, Gelli,
Volcaci, Figuli, Cottae, L. Caesaris, C. Pisonis, M'. Glabrionis, etiam
Silani, Murenae, designatorum consulum. Cur ergo in sententiam Catonis?
Quia verbis luculentioribus et pluribus rem eandem comprehenderat. Me
autem hic laudat, quod rettulerim,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 43

my grief. Can I do so better than by spending all my days in writing?
Though I do it, not to hide, but rather to soften and to heal my
feelings, still, if I do myself but little good, I certainly keep up
appearances.

My letter is shorter than it might be, because I am expecting your
answer to mine of yesterday. I am most anxious about the shrine and a
little about Terentia too. Please let me know in your next letter
whether Cn. Caepio, father of Claudius' wife Servilia, perished by
shipwreck during his father's life or after his death, and whether
Rutilia died before or after her son C. Cotta.[59] They concern the book
I have written on the lightening of grief.

Footnote 59:

  Cotta was a celebrated orator, and held the consulship in 75 B.C. His
  mother Rutilia survived him, according to Seneca (_Consol. ad
  Helviam_, 16, 7).


                                  XXI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 17_, B.C. _45_]

I have read Brutus' letter and am sending it back to you. It is not at
all a sensible answer to the points in which you found him wanting. But
that is his look out: though in one thing it shows disgraceful ignorance
on his part. He thinks Cato was the first to deliver a speech for the
punishment of the conspirators, though everybody except Caesar had
spoken before him: and that, though Caesar's speech, delivered from the
praetorian bench, was so severe, those of the ex-consuls, Catulus,
Servilius, the Luculli, Curio, Torquatus, Lepidus, Gellius, Volcacius,
Figulus, Cotta, L. Caesar, C. Piso, M'. Glabrio, and even the consuls
elect Silanus and Murena, were milder. Why then was the division taken
on Cato's proposal? Because he had summed up the same matter in clearer
and fuller words. My merit according to Brutus lay in bringing the
affair

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 44

non quod patefecerim, quod cohortatus sim, quod denique ante, quam
consulerem, ipse iudicaverim. Quae omnia quia Cato laudibus extulerat in
caelum perscribendaque censuerat, idcirco in eius sententiam est facta
discessio. Hic autem se etiam tribuere multum mi putat, quod scripserit
"optimum consulem." Quis enim ieiunius dixit inimicus? Ad cetera vero
tibi quem ad modum rescripsit! Tantum rogat, de senatus consulto ut
corrigas. Hoc quidem fecisset, etiamsi a librario admonitus esset. Sed
haec iterum ipse viderit.

De hortis quoniam probas, effice aliquid. Rationes meas nosti. Si vero
etiam a Faberio recedit, nihil negotii est. Sed etiam sine eo posse
videor contendere. Venales certe sunt Drusi, fortasse etiam Lamiani et
Cassiani. Sed coram.

De Terentia non possum commodius scribere, quam tu scribis. Officium sit
nobis antiquissimum. Si quid nos fefellerit, illius malo me quam mei
paenitere. Oviae C. Lolli curanda sunt HS ¯C¯. Negat Eros posse sine
me, credo, quod accipienda aliqua sit et danda aestimatio. Vellem, tibi
dixisset. Si enim res est, ut mihi scripsit, parata, nec in eo ipso
mentitur, per te confici potuit. Id cognoscas et conficias velim.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 45

before the House, not in finding it out, nor in urging them to take
steps, nor yet in making up my own mind before I took the House's
opinion. And it was because Cato extolled those actions of mine to the
skies and moved that they should be put on record, that the vote was
taken on his motion. Brutus again seems to think he is giving me high
praise by calling me an "excellent consul." Why, has anyone, even a
personal enemy, ever used a more grudging term? To the rest of your
criticisms too what a poor answer he has given! He only asks you to
alter the point about the decree of the Senate. He would have done as
much as that at the suggestion of a clerk. But that again is his own
look out.

Since you approve of the garden idea, manage it somehow. You know my
resources. If I get something back[60] from Faberius, there will be no
difficulty. But I think I can manage even without that. Drusus' gardens
are certainly for sale, and I think those of Lamianus and Cassianus too.
But, when we meet.

Footnote 60:

  _Recedit_ is generally altered by editors. But for this rare sense of
  the word Reid compares _Pro Quinctio_, 38.

About Terentia I cannot say anything more suitable than you do in your
letter. Duty must be my first consideration. If I have made a mistake, I
would rather have to repent for her sake than for my own. C. Lollius'
wife Ovia has to be paid 900 guineas.[61] Eros says it can't be done
without me, I suppose because some property has to pass between us at a
valuation.[62] I wish he had told you. For, if, as he said, the matter
is arranged, and that is not precisely where he is deceiving me, it
could be managed through you. Please find out and finish it.

Footnote 61:

  100,000 sesterces.

Footnote 62:

  _Aestimatio_ = land made over by a debtor to a creditor at a
  valuation.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 46

Quod me in forum vocas, eo vocas, unde etiam bonis meis rebus fugiebam.
Quid enim mihi foro sine iudiciis, sine curia, in oculos incurrentibus
iis, quos aequo animo videre non possum? Quod autem a me homines
postulare scribis ut Romae sim neque mihi ut absim concedere,[63] aut
aliquatenus[64] eos mihi concedere, iam pridem scito esse, cum unum te
pluris quam omnes illos putem. Ne me quidem contemno meoque iudicio
multo stare malo quam omnium reliquorum. Neque tamen progredior longius,
quam mihi doctissimi homines concedunt; quorum scripta omnia, quaecumque
sunt in eam sententiam, non legi solum, quod ipsum erat fortis aegroti,
accipere medicinam, sed in mea etiam scripta transtuli, quod certe
adflicti et fracti animi non fuit. Ab his me remediis noli in istam
turbam vocare, ne recidam.

Footnote 63:

  ut Romae ... concedere _added by old editors_.

Footnote 64:

  aliquatenus _Andresen_: quatenus _MSS._


                                  XXII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae XV K. Apr. a. 709_]

De Terentia quod mihi omne onus imponis, non cognosco tuam in me
indulgentiam. Ista enim sunt ipsa vulnera, quae non possum tractare sine
maximo gemitu. Moderare igitur, quaeso, ut potes. Neque enim a te plus,
quam potes, postulo. Potes autem, quid veri sit, perspicere tu unus. De
Rutilia quoniam videris dubitare, scribes ad me, cum scies, sed quam
primum, et num Clodia D. Bruto consulari, filio suo, mortuo vixerit. Id
de Marcello aut certe

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 47

In calling me back to the forum, you call me to a place I shunned even
in my happy days. What have I to do with a forum, where there are no
lawcourts, no Senate, and where people are continually obtruding
themselves on my sight, whom I cannot endure to see? You say people are
demanding my presence at Rome, and will not allow me to be absent, or at
any rate only for a certain time. Rest assured that I have long held you
at a higher value than them all. Myself too I do not underrate, and I
far prefer to trust my own judgment than that of all the rest. However I
am not going further than the wisest heads allow. I have not only read
all their writings on the point, which in itself shows I am a brave
invalid and take my medicine, but I have transferred them to my own
work; and that certainly does not argue a mind crushed and enfeebled. Do
not call me back from these remedies into that busy life, for fear I
relapse.


                                  XXII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 18_, B.C. _45_]

About Terentia, I do not recognise your usual consideration for me in
throwing the whole weight of the matter on me. For those are the very
wounds I cannot touch without deep groans. So please spare me, if you
can. For I am not asking you more than you can do. You and you only can
see what is fair. About Rutilia, as you seem to have doubts, write and
let me know as soon as you know, but let that be as soon as possible:
and also whether Clodia survived her son D. Brutus the ex-consul. The
latter you can find out from Marcellus, or at any

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 48

de Postumia sciri potest, illud autem de M. Cotta aut de Syro aut de
Satyro.

De hortis etiam atque etiam rogo. Omnibus meis eorumque, quos scio mihi
non defuturos, facultatibus (sed potero meis) enitendum mihi est. Sunt
etiam, quae vendere facile possim. Sed ut non vendam eique usuram
pendam, a quo emero, non plus annum, possum adsequi, quod volo, si tu me
adiuvas. Paratissimi sunt Drusi; cupit enim vendere. Proximos puto
Lamiae; sed abest. Tu tamen, si quid potes, odorare. Ne Silius quidem
quicquam utitur suis et is[65] usuris facillime sustentabitur. Habe tuum
negotium, nec, quid res mea familiaris postulet, quam ego non curo, sed
quid velim, existima.

Footnote 65:

  suis et is _Wesenberg_: et iis _MSS._


                                 XXIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae XIV K. Apr. a. 709_]

Putaram te aliquid novi, quod eius modi fuerat initium litterarum,
"quamvis non curarem, quid in Hispania fieret, tamen te scripturum"; sed
videlicet meis litteris respondisti ut de foro et de curia. Sed domus
est, ut ais, forum. Quid ipsa domo mihi opus est carenti foro?
Occidimus, occidimus, Attice, iam pridem nos quidem, sed nunc fatemur,
posteaquam unum, quo tenebamur, amisimus. Itaque solitudinem sequor, et
tamen, si qua me res isto adduxerit, enitar, si quo modo potero (potero
autem), ut praeter te nemo dolorem meum sentiat, si ullo modo poterit,
ne tu

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 49

rate from Postumia, the former from M. Cotta or Syrus or Satyrus.

About the gardens I earnestly entreat your aid. I must employ all my own
resources and those of friends, who I know will not desert me: but I can
manage with my own. There are things I could sell easily too. But
without selling anything, if I pay interest to the person from whom I
buy for no more than a year, I can get what I want, if you assist me.
The most available are those of Drusus, as he wants to sell. The next I
think are Lamia's; but he is away. However scent out anything you can.
Silius again never uses his at all, and he will very easily be satisfied
with the interest. Regard it as your own business, and don't consider
what suits my purse, for that I don't care, but what suits me.


                                 XXIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 19_, B.C. _45_]

From the beginning of your letter "though I did not care what happened
in Spain, still you would write," I thought you had some news from me:
but I see you have answered my letter only as regards the forum and the
Senate. But, you say, my house at Rome is a forum. What is the good of
the house alone to me, if I have not the forum? I am dead and done for,
Atticus, and have been this long while: but now I confess it, when I
have lost the one link that bound me to life. So what I want is
solitude. Still if in my despite anything drags me to Rome, I shall
strive, if possible (and I will make it possible), to keep my grief from
all eyes but yours, and, if it is anyhow possible, even from yours.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 50

quidem. Atque etiam illa causa est non veniendi. Meministi, quid ex te
Aledius quaesierit. Qui etiam nunc molesti sunt, quid existimas, si
venero?

De Terentia ita cura, ut scribis, meque hac ad maximas aegritudines
accessione non maxima libera. Et, ut scias me ita dolere, ut non iaceam,
quibus consulibus Carneades et ea legatio Romam venerit, scriptum est in
tuo annali: haec nunc quaero quae causa fuerit. De Oropo, opinor, sed
certum nescio. Et, si ita est, quae controversiae. Praeterea, qui eo
tempore nobilis Epicureus fuerit Athenisque praefuerit hortis, qui etiam
Athenis πολιτικοὶ fuerint illustres. Quae etiam ex Apollodori puto posse
inveniri.

De Attica molestum, sed, quoniam leviter, recte esse confido. De Gamala
dubium non mihi erat. Unde enim tam felix Ligus pater? Nam quid de me
dicam, cui ut omnia contingant, quae volo, levar non possum?

De Drusi hortis, quanti licuisse tu scribis, id ego quoque audieram, et,
ut opinor, heri ad te scripseram; sed quantiquanti, bene emitur, quod
necesse est. Mihi, quoquo modo tu existimas (scio enim, ego ipse quid de
me existimem), levatio quaedam est, si minus doloris, at officii debiti.

Ad Siccam scripsi, quod utitur L. Cotta. Si nihil conficietur de
Transtiberinis, habet in Ostiensi Cotta

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 51

Besides there is this reason for not coming. You remember the questions
Aledius asked you. They are annoying to me even now. What do you suppose
they will be, if I come?

Arrange about Terentia as you say, and rid me of this addition—though
not the weightiest—to my weighty griefs and sorrows. To show you that my
sorrow is not prostration, you have entered in your Chronicle the date
of the visit of Carneades and that famous embassy to Rome:[66] I want to
know now the cause of its coming. I think it was about Oropus: but I am
not certain. And, if that is so, what was the point in question?
Further, who was the most distinguished Epicurean of the time and the
head of the Garden at Athens; also who were the famous politicians
there? I think you can find all those things in Apollodorus' book.

Footnote 66:

  Three celebrated philosophers, Carneades, Diogenes, and Critolaus,
  came to Rome in 155 B.C. to plead against the fine of 500 talents
  imposed on Athens for raiding Oropus.

It is annoying about Attica; but, as it is a mild attack, I expect it
will be all right. About Gamala I had no doubt. For why was his father
Ligus so fortunate? Need I mention my own case, when I am incapable of
getting relief, though everything I wish were to happen.

The price you mention for Drusus' gardens I too had heard, and had
written about it to you, yesterday I think. Whatever the price is, what
is necessary is cheap. In my eyes, whatever you may think—for I know
what I think of myself—it relieves my mind of a bounden duty, if not of
sorrow.

I have written to Sicca, because he is intimate with L. Cotta. If
nothing can be managed about gardens across the Tiber, Cotta has some at
Ostia in

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 52

celeberrimo loco, sed pusillum loci, ad hanc rem tamen plus etiam quam
satis. Id velim cogites. Nec tamen ista pretia hortorum pertimueris. Nec
mihi iam argento nec veste opus est nec quibusdam amoenis locis; hoc
opus est. Video etiam, a quibus adiuvari possim. Sed loquere cum Silio;
nihil enim est melius. Mandavi etiam Siccae. Rescripsit constitutum se
cum eo habere. Scribet igitur ad me, quid egerit, et tu videbis.


                                  XXIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae XIII K. Apr. a. u. c. 709_]

Bene fecit A. Silius, qui transegerit. Neque enim ei deesse volebam et,
quid possem, timebam. De Ovia confice, ut scribis. De Cicerone tempus
esse iam videtur; sed quaero, quod illi opus erit, Athenis permutarine
possit an ipsi ferendum sit, de totaque re, quem ad modum et quando
placeat, velim consideres. Publilius iturusne sit in Africam et quando,
ex Aledio scire poteris. Quaeras et ad me scribas velim. Et, ut ad meas
ineptias redeam, velim me certiorem facias, P. Crassus, Venuleiae
filius, vivone P. Crasso consulari, patre suo, mortuus sit, ut ego
meminisse videor, an post. Item quaero de Regillo, Lepidi filio, rectene
meminerim patre vivo mortuum. Cispiana explicabis itemque Preciana. De
Attica optime. Et ei salutem dices et Piliae.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 53

a very public place. They are cramped for room, but more than sufficient
for this purpose. Please think of that. But don't be afraid of the price
you mention for the gardens. I don't want plate or raiment or any
pleasant places now: I want this. I see, too, who can help me. But speak
to Silius; you can't do better. I have given Sicca a commission too. He
answered that he has made an appointment with him. So he will write and
tell me what he has done, and you will see to it.


                                  XXIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 20_, B.C. _45_]

I am glad Silius has settled the business: for I did not want to fail
him and was afraid I might not be able to manage it. Settle about Ovia
as you say. As to my son it seems high time now; but I want to know
whether he can get a draft for his allowance changed at Athens or
whether he must take it with him; and as regards the whole matter please
consider how and when you think he ought to go. Whether Publilius is
going to Africa and when, you can find out from Aledius. Please enquire
and let me know. And, to return to my own nonsense, please inform me
whether P. Crassus, the son of Venuleia, died in the lifetime of his
father, P. Crassus the ex-consul, as I seem to remember, or after his
death. I also want to know whether my recollection is right that
Regillus, son of Lepidus, died in his father's lifetime. You must settle
the business about Cispius and Precius. As to Attica, bravo! Pay my
respects to her and to Pilia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 54


                                  XXV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae XII K. Apr. a. 709_]

Scripsit ad me diligenter Sicca de Silio seque ad te rem detulisse; quod
tu idem scribis. Mihi et res et condicio placet, sed ita, ut numerato
malim quam aestimatione. Voluptarias enim possessiones nolet Silius;
vectigalibus autem ut his possum esse contentus, quae habeo, sic vix
minoribus. Unde ergo numerate? HS ¯DC¯ exprimes ab Hermogene, cum
praesertim necesse erit, et domi video esse HS ¯DC¯. Reliquae pecuniae
vel usuram Silio pendemus, dum a Faberio, vel cum aliquo, qui Faberio
debet, repraesentabimus. Erit etiam aliquid alicunde. Sed totam rem tu
gubernabis. Drusianis vero hortis multo antepono, neque sunt umquam
comparati. Mihi crede, una me causa movet, in qua scio me τετυφῶσθαι.
Sed, ut facis, obsequere huic errori meo. Nam, quod scribis "ἐγγήραμα,"
actum iam de isto est; alia magis quaero.


                                  XXVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae XI K. Apr. a. 709_]

Sicca, ut scribit, etiamsi nihil confecerit cum A. Silio, tamen se
scribit X Kal. esse venturum. Tuis

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 55


                                  XXV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 21_, B.C. _45_]

Sicca has written to me in detail about Silius, and says he has reported
the matter to you; and you say the same in your letter. I am pleased
with the property and the conditions, except that I would rather pay
money down than assign property at a valuation. Silius will not want
show places and I can make myself contented on the income I have, though
hardly on less. So where can I get ready money? You can extort 5,000
guineas[67] from Hermogenes, especially as it will be necessary; and I
find I have another 5,000 by me. For the rest of the money I will either
pay interest to Silius, until I get it from Faberius, or get the money
to pay with at once from some debtor of Faberius. There will be some
coming in too from other quarters. But you can take charge of the whole
matter. I much prefer them to Drusus' gardens; indeed the two have never
been compared. Believe me I am actuated by one single motive. I know I
have gone silly about it; but continue to bear with my folly. For it is
no use your talking about a place to grow old in[68]; that is all over.
There are other things I want more.

Footnote 67:

  600,000 sesterces.

Footnote 68:

  For ἐγγήραμα cf. XII. 29; others take it to mean a "solace for old
  age."


                                  XXVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 22_, B.C. _45_]

According to his letter Sicca is coming to me on the 23rd, even if he
has not settled anything with A. Silius. You I excuse on the score of
business,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 56

occupationibus ignosco, eaeque mihi sunt notae. De voluntate tua, ut
simul simus, vel studio potius et cupiditate non dubito. De Nicia quod
scribis, si ita me haberem, ut eius humanitate frui possem, in primis
vellem illum mecum habere. Sed mihi solitudo et recessus provincia est.
Quod quia facile ferebat Sicca, eo magis illum desidero. Praeterea nosti
Niciae nostri imbecillitatem, mollitiam, consuetudinem victus. Cur ergo
illi molestus esse velim, cum mihi ille iucundus esse non possit?
Voluntas tamen eius mihi grata est. Unam rem ad me scripsisti, de qua
decrevi nihil tibi rescribere. Spero enim me a te impetrasse, ut
privares me ista molestia. Piliae et Atticae salutem.


                                 XXVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae X K. Apr. a. 709_]

De Siliano negotio, etsi mihi non est ignota condicio, tamen hodie me ex
Sicca arbitror omnia cogniturum. Cottae quod negas te nosse, ultra
Silianam villam est, quam puto tibi notam esse, villula sordida et valde
pusilla, nil agri, ad nullam rem loci satis nisi ad eam, quam quaero.
Sequor celebritatem. Sed, si perficitur de hortis Sili, hoc est si
perficis (est enim totum positum in te), nihil est scilicet, quod de
Cotta cogitemus.

De Cicerone, ut scribis, ita faciam; ipsi permittam

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 57

knowing what your business is. I have no doubt of your wish, or rather
your eager desire, to be with me. You mention Nicias.[69] If I were in a
condition to enjoy his cultivated conversation, he is one of the first
persons I should wish to have with me. But solitude and retirement are
my proper sphere: and it is because Sicca can content himself with that,
that I am the more eager for his visit. Besides you know how delicate
our Nicias is, and his luxurious way of living. So why should I want to
put him to inconvenience, when he cannot give me any pleasure? However I
am grateful to him for wishing it. There is one point you wrote about,
which I have made up my mind not to answer. For I hope I have prevailed
upon you to relieve me from the burden.[70] My greetings to Pilia and
Attica.

Footnote 69:

  A grammarian of Cos. Cf. VII. 3.

Footnote 70:

  Cicero refers to the arrangement with Terentia for the repayment of
  her dowry.


                                 XXVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 23_, B.C. _45_]

As to the business with Silius, I know the terms well enough, but I
expect to hear full details from Sicca to-day. Cotta's place, which you
say you don't know, is beyond Silius' house, which I think you know. It
is a shabby little house and very tiny, with no ground, and not big
enough for anything except the purpose for which I require it. I am
looking for a public position. But, if the matter is being settled about
Silius' gardens,—that is, if you settle it, for it rests entirely with
you—there is no reason for thinking of Cotta.

About my son I will do as you say. I will leave

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 58

de tempore. Nummorum quantum opus erit, ut permutetur, tu videbis. Ex
Aledio, quod scribas, si quid inveneris, scribes. Et ego ex tuis
animadverto litteris, et profecto tu ex meis, nihil habere nos quod
scribamus, eadem cotidie, quae iam iamque ipsa contrita sunt. Tamen
facere non possum, quin cotidie ad te mittam, ut tuas accipiam. De Bruto
tamen, si quid habebis. Scire enim iam puto, ubi Pansam exspectet. Si,
ut consuetudo est, in prima provincia, circiter Kal. adfuturus videtur.
Vellem tardius; valde enim urbem fugio multas ob causas. Itaque id ipsum
dubito, an excusationem aliquam ad illum parem; quod quidem video facile
esse. Sed habemus satis temporis ad cogitandum. Piliae, Atticae salutem.


                                 XXVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae IX K. Apr. a. 709_]

De Silio nilo plura cognovi ex praesente Sicca quam ex litteris eius.
Scripserat enim diligenter. Si igitur tu illum conveneris, scribes ad
me, si quid videbitur. De quo putas ad me missum esse, sit missum necne,
nescio; dictum quidem mihi certe nihil est. Tu igitur, ut coepisti, et,
si quid ita conficies, quod equidem non arbitror fieri posse, ut illi
probetur, Ciceronem, si tibi placebit, adhibebis. Eius aliquid interest
videri illius causa voluisse, mea quidem

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 59

the time to him. See that he is provided with a bill of exchange for as
much as is necessary. If you have been able to get anything out of
Aledius, as you say, write and tell me. I gather from your letter, and
certainly you will from mine, that we have nothing to say to each
other—the same old things day after day, though they are long ago worn
threadbare. Still I cannot help sending to you every day to get a letter
from you. However tell me about Brutus, if you have any information. For
I suppose he knows now where to expect Pansa. If, as is generally the
case, on the border of his province, he ought to be here about the first
of the month. I wish it were later; for there are plenty of reasons why
I shun the city. So I am even wondering whether I should make some
excuse to him. I could do so easily enough. But there is plenty of time
to think about it. My greetings to Pilia and Attica.


                                 XXVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 24_, B.C. _45_]

About Silius I have learned nothing more from Sicca now he is here than
from his letter, for he had written quite fully. So if you meet him,
write and tell me your views. As to the matter on which you think a
message has been sent to me, I don't know whether one has been sent or
not; certainly not a word has been said to me. So go on as you have
begun, and, if you come to any arrangement that satisfies her, which I
don't think at all likely, take my son with you to her, if you like. It
is to his interest to appear to have wanted to do something to

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 60

nihil nisi id, quod tu scis, quod ego magni aestimo.

Quod me ad meam consuetudinem revocas, fuit meum quidem iam pridem rem
publicam lugere, quod faciebam, sed mitius; erat enim, ubi acquiescerem.
Nunc plane nec ego victum nec vitam illam colere possum, nec in ea re,
quid aliis videatur, mihi puto curandum; mea mihi conscientia pluris est
quam omnium sermo. Quod me ipse per litteras consolatus sum, non
paenitet me, quantum profecerim. Maerorem minui, dolorem nec potui nec,
si possem, vellem.

De Triario bene interpretaris voluntatem meam. Tu vero nihil, nisi ut
illi volent. Amo illum mortuum, tutor sum liberis, totam domum diligo.
De Castriciano negotio, si Castricius pro mancipiis pecuniam accipere
volet eamque ita[71] solvi, ut nunc solvitur, certe nihil est commodius.
Sin autem ita actum est, ut ipsa mancipia abduceret, non mihi videtur
esse aequum (rogas enim me, ut tibi scribam, quid mihi videatur); nolo
enim negotii Quintum fratrem quicquam habere; quod videor mihi
intellexisse tibi videri idem. Publilius, si aequinoctium exspectat, ut
scribis Aledium dicere, navigaturus videtur. Mihi autem dixerat per
Siciliam. Utrum et quando, velim scire. Et velim aliquando, cum erit
tuum commodum, Lentulum puerum visas eique de mancipiis, quae tibi
videbitur, attribuas. Piliae, Atticae salutem.

Footnote 71:

  ita _Tyrrell_: ei _MSS._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 61

please her; I have no interest in the matter, except that you know of,
which I consider important.

You call me back to my old way of life. Well, I have long been bewailing
the loss of the Republic, and that was what I was doing, though less
strongly; for I had one harbour of refuge. Now I positively cannot
follow my old way of life and employment; nor do I think I ought to care
what others think about that. My own conscience is more to me than all
their talk. For the consolation I have sought in writing, I am not
discontented with my measure of success. It has made me show my grief
less; but the grief itself I could not lessen, nor would I, if I could.

About Triarius you interpret my wishes well. However do nothing without
his family's consent. I love him, though he is dead: I am guardian to
his children, and feel affection for all his household. As regards the
business with Castricius, if he is willing to take money estimated at
its present rate instead of the slaves, nothing could be more
convenient. But, if things have gone so far that he is taking the slaves
away, I don't think it is fair to him to ask him (you ask me to give you
my real opinion); for I don't want my brother Quintus to have any
bother, and I rather fancy you take the same view. If Publilius is
waiting for the equinox, as you say Aledius tells you, I suppose he is
going by sea; but he told me he was going by way of Sicily. I should
like to know which it is and when. I should like you too some time at
your convenience to pay a visit to little Lentulus[72] and assign him
such of the household as you think fit. Love to Pilia and Attica.

Footnote 72:

  The son of Tullia and Dolabella, so called because Dolabella was
  adopted into the plebeian _gens_ of the Lentuli in 49 B.C. in order to
  stand for the tribunate.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 62


                                  XXIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VIII K. Apr. a. 709_]

Silius, ut scribis, hodie. Cras igitur, vel potius cum poteris, scribes,
si quid erit, cum videris. Nec ego Brutum vito nec tamen ab eo
levationem ullam exspecto; sed erant causae; cur hoc tempore istic esse
nollem. Quae si manebunt, quaerenda erit excusatio ad Brutum, et, ut
nunc est, mansurae videntur.

De hortis, quaeso, explica. Caput illud est, quod scis. Sequitur, ut
etiam mihi ipsi quiddam opus sit; nec enim esse in turba possum nec a
vobis abesse. Huic meo consilio nihil reperio isto loco aptius, et de
hac re quid tui consilii sit. Mihi persuasum est, et eo magis, quod idem
intellexi tibi videri, me ab Oppio et Balbo valde diligi. Cum his
communices, quanto opere et quare velim hortos; sed id ita posse, si
expediatur illud Faberianum; sintne igitur auctores futuri. Si qua etiam
iactura facienda sit in repraesentando, quoad possunt, adducito; totum
enim illud desperatum. Denique intelleges, ecquid inclinent ad hoc meum
consilium adiuvandum. Si quid erit, magnum est adiumentum; si minus,
quacumque ratione contendamus. Vel tu illud "ἐγγήραμα," quem ad modum
scripsisti, vel ἐντάφιον putato. De illo Ostiensi nihil est cogitandum.
Si hoc non assequimur (a Lamia non puto posse), Damasippi experiendum
est.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 63


                                  XXIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 25_, B.C. _45_]

You say you will see Silius to-day; so to-morrow, or as soon as you can,
write, if anything comes of your meeting. I am not trying to avoid
Brutus, though I don't expect to get any consolation from him. But there
are reasons why I do not want to go there at this particular time. If
those reasons continue to exist, I shall have to find some excuse to
offer him, and by the look of things at present, I think they will
continue.

As for the gardens, please finish the business. The main point is what
you know. A further consideration is that I myself want something of the
kind; for I cannot exist in a crowd, nor can I be far from you. For my
purpose I cannot see anything better adapted than that particular place,
and I should like to know what your opinion is. I am quite sure,
especially as I see you think so too, that Oppius and Balbus are very
fond of me. Let them know how eager I am for the gardens and why; but
that it is only possible, if the business with Faberius is settled; and
ask whether they will go bail for the payment. Even if I must bear some
loss in return for getting ready money, draw them on as far as they will
go: for there is no chance of getting the full debt. In fact, find out
if they show any inclination to assist my plan. If they do, it is a
great assistance; if not, we must manage somehow or other. Look upon it
as "a place to grow old in," to use your own phrase, or if you like as a
burial place for me. It is no use thinking of the place at Ostium. If we
don't get this, I feel sure, we shall not get Lamia's; so we must try
for Damasippus' place.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 64


                                  XXX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VI K. Apr. a. 709_]

Quaero, quod ad te scribam, sed nihil est. Eadem cotidie. Quod Lentulum
invisis, valde gratum. Pueros attribue ei, quot et quos videbitur. De
Sili voluntate vendendi et de eo, quanti, tu vereri videris, primum ne
nolit, deinde ne tanti. Sicca aliter; sed tibi adsentior. Quare, ut ei
placuit, scripsi ad Egnatium. Quod Silius te cum Clodio loqui vult,
potes id mea voluntate facere, commodiusque est quam, quod ille a me
petit, me ipsum scribere ad Clodium. De mancipiis Castricianis
commodissimum esse credo transigere Egnatium, quod scribis te ita
futurum putare. Cum Ovia, quaeso, vide ut conficiatur. Quoniam, ut
scribis, nox erat, in hodierna epistula plura exspecto.


                                  XXXI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae IV K. Apr. a. 709_]

Silium mutasse sententiam Sicca mirabatur. Equidem magis miror, quod,
cum in filium causam conferret, quae mihi non iniusta videtur (habet
enim, qualem vult), ais te putare, si addiderimus aliud, a quo refugiat,
cum ab ipso id fuerit destinatum, venditurum. Quaeris a me, quod summum
pretium

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 65


                                  XXX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 27_, B.C. _45_]

I am trying to find something to say to you; but there is nothing. The
same things every day. I am much obliged to you for paying a visit to
Lentulus. Assign him as many slaves as you like and select them
yourself. As to Silius' inclination to sell and his price, you seem to
fear first that he won't want to sell and secondly not at that price.
Sicca thought differently; but I agree with you. So, as he suggested, I
wrote to Egnatius. Silius wants you to speak to Clodius. You have my
full consent to do so, indeed it is more convenient than for me to write
to Clodius myself, as he wanted. As to Castricius' slaves I think it is
most convenient that Egnatius should carry the matter through,[73] as
you say you think he will. With Ovia please see that some arrangement is
made. As you say it was night when you wrote, I expect more in to-day's
letter.

Footnote 73:

  Shuckburgh takes this as "I think Egnatius is making a very good
  bargain." But it seems difficult to get that out of the Latin. Cf.
  also XII. 32, 1.


                                  XXXI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 29_, B.C. _45_]

Sicca is surprised that Silius has changed his mind. For my part I am
more surprised that, when he makes his son the excuse—and it seems to me
a good enough excuse, as his son is all he could wish—you say you think
he will sell, if we add one other thing, which he shrinks from
mentioning, though he has set his heart on it.[74] You ask me to fix my

Footnote 74:

  Others take _destinare_ here in the Plautine sense of "buy"; and
  Shuckburgh translates the end of the sentence "if we should include
  something else, which he is anxious to get rid of, as he had of his
  own accord determined not to do so."

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 66

constituam et quantum anteire istos hortos Drusi. Accessi numquam;
Coponianam villam et veterem et non magnam novi, silvam nobilem, fructum
autem neutrius, quod tamen puto nos scire oportere. Sed mihi utrivis
istorum tempore magis meo quam ratione aestimandi sunt. Possim autem
adsequi necne, tu velim cogites. Si enim Faberianum venderem, explicare
vel repraesentatione non dubitarem de Silianis, si modo adduceretur, ut
venderet. Si venales non haberet, transirem ad Drusum vel tanti, quanti
Egnatius illum velle tibi dixit. Magno etiam adiumento nobis Hermogenes
potest esse in repraesentando. At tu concede mihi, quaeso, ut eo animo
sim, quo is debeat esse, qui emere cupiat, et tamen ita servio
cupiditati et dolori meo, ut a te regi velim.


                                 XXXII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae V K. Apr. a. 709_]

Egnatius mihi scripsit. Is si quid tecum locutus erit (commodissime enim
per eum agi potest), ad me scribes, et id agendum puto. Nam cum Silio
non video confici posse. Piliae et Atticae salutem.

Haec ad te mea manu. Vide, quaeso, quid agendum sit. Publilia ad me
scripsit matrem suam, cum Publilio videretur,[75] ad me cum illo
venturam, et se una, si ego paterer. Orat multis et supplicibus verbis,
ut liceat, et ut sibi rescribam. Res quam molesta

Footnote 75:

  videretur _Klotz_: loqueretur _MSS._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 67

outside price and say how much I prefer them to Drusus' gardens. I have
never been in them; I know Coponius' country house is old and not very
large and the wood a fine one; but I don't know what either brings in,
and that I think we ought to know. But for me either of them should be
reckoned rather by my need than by the market value. However please
consider whether I can get them or not. If I were to sell my claim on
Faberius, I should have no doubt about settling for Silius' gardens even
with ready money, if only he could be induced to sell. If his are not
for sale, I should have recourse to Drusus, even at the price Egnatius
said he asked. Hermogenes too can be a great assistance to me in getting
ready money. You must not mind my being eager, one ought to be when one
is wanting to make a purchase. However I won't give way to my wishes and
my grief so far as not to be ruled by you.


                                 XXXII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 28_, B.C. _45_]

Egnatius has written to me. If he has spoken to you, write and tell me,
for the matter can be arranged most conveniently through him, and I
think that is what ought to be done. For I don't see any chance of
settling with Silius. My greetings to Pilia and Attica.

The rest I have written myself. Pray see what can be done. Publilia has
written to me that her mother is coming to me with Publilius at his
suggestion and that she will come too, if I will let her. She begs me
urgently and humbly to allow her and to answer her. You see what a
nuisance it is. I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 68

sit, vides. Rescripsi mi etiam gravius esse quam tum, cum illi dixissem
me solum esse velle. Quare nolle me hoc tempore eam ad me venire.
Putabam, si nihil rescripsissem, illam cum matre venturam; nunc non
puto. Apparebat enim illas litteras non esse ipsius. Illud autem, quod
fore video, ipsum volo vitare, ne illae ad me veniant, et una est
vitatio, ut ego avolem. Nollem, sed necesse est. Te hoc nunc rogo, ut
explores, ad quam diem hic ita possim esse, ut ne opprimar. Ages, ut
scribis, temperate.

Ciceroni velim hoc proponas, ita tamen, si tibi non iniquum videbitur,
ut sumptus huius peregrinationis, quibus, si Romae esset domumque
conduceret, quod facere cogitabat, facile contentus futurus erat,
accommodet ad mercedes Argileti et Aventini, et, cum ei proposueris,
ipse velim reliqua moderere, quem ad modum ex iis mercedibus
suppeditemus ei, quod opus sit. Praestabo nec Bibulum nec Acidinum nec
Messallam, quos Athenis futuros audio, maiores sumptus facturos, quam
quod ex eis mercedibus recipietur. Itaque velim videas, primum
conductores qui sint et quanti, deinde ut sit, qui ad diem solvat, et
quid viatici, quid instrumenti satis sit. Iumento certe Athenis nihil
opus est. Quibus autem in via utatur, domi sunt plura, quam opus erat,
quod etiam tu animadvertis.


                                 XXXIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VII K. Apr. a. 709_]

Ego, ut heri ad te scripsi, si et Silius is fuerit, quem tu putas, nec
Drusus facilem se praebuerit, Damasippum velim adgrediare. Is, opinor,
ita partes

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 69

answered that I was even worse than when I told her I wanted to be
alone; so she must not think of coming to me at the present time. I
thought, if I had not answered, she would come with her mother, now I
don't think she will. For evidently that letter is not her own. But the
thing that I see will happen—that they will come to me—is the very thing
I want to avoid, and the one way of avoiding it is for me to flee. I
don't want to, but I must. Now I want you to find out how long I can
stay without being caught. Act as you say, with moderation.

Please suggest to my son, that is if you think it fair, that he should
keep the expenses of this journey within the rents of my property in the
Argiletum and the Aventine, with which he would have been quite
contented, if he stayed in Rome and hired a house, as he was thinking of
doing: and, when you have made the suggestion, I should like you to
arrange the rest, so that we may supply him with what is necessary from
those rents. I will guarantee that neither Bibulus nor Acidinus nor
Messalla, who I hear are at Athens, will spend more than he will get out
of those rents. So please see who the tenants are and what they pay,
secondly that they are punctual payers, and what journey money and
outfit will suffice. There is certainly no need of a carriage at Athens,
while for what he wants on the journey, we have more than enough, as you
also observe.


                                 XXXIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 26_, B.C. _45_]

As I said in my letter yesterday, if Silius is the sort of man you think
him and Drusus is hard to deal with, I should like you to approach
Damasippus. He

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 70

fecit in ripa nescio quotenorum iugerum, ut certa pretia constitueret;
quae mihi nota non sunt. Scribes ad me igitur, quicquid egeris.

Vehementer me sollicitat Atticae nostrae valetudo, ut verear etiam, ne
quae culpa sit. Sed et paedagogi probitas et medici adsiduitas et tota
domus in omni genere diligens me rursus id suspicari vetat. Cura igitur;
plura enim non possum.


                                 XXXIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae III K. Apr. a. 709_]

Ego hic vel sine Sicca (Tironi enim melius est) facillime possem esse ut
in malis, sed, cum scribas videndum mihi esse, ne opprimar, ex quo
intellegam te certum diem illius profectionis non habere, putavi esse
commodius me istuc venire; quod idem video tibi placere. Cras igitur in
Siccae suburbano. Inde, quem ad modum suades, puto me in Ficulensi fore.
Quibus de rebus ad me scripsisti, quoniam ipse venio, coram videbimus.
Tuam quidem et in agendis nostris rebus et in consiliis ineundis mihique
dandis in ipsis litteris, quas mittis, benevolentiam, diligentiam,
prudentiam mirifice diligo. Tu tamen, si quid cum Silio, vel illo ipso
die, quo ad Siccam venturus ero, certiorem me velim facias, et maxime
cuius loci detractionem fieri velit. Quod enim scribis "extremi," vide,
ne is ipse locus sit, cuius causa de tota re, ut scis, est a nobis
cogitatum. Hirti epistulam tibi misi et recentem et benevole scriptam.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 71

I think, has divided up his property on the banks of the Tiber into lots
of so and so many acres with fixed prices, which I don't know. So write
and tell me, whatever you do.

I am much disturbed about dear Attica's ill-health, it almost makes me
fear it is somebody's fault. But the good character of her tutor, the
attention of her doctor, and the carefulness of the whole household in
every way forbid me to entertain that suspicion. So take care of her. I
can write no more.


                                 XXXIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March 30_, B.C. _45_]

I could be very comfortable here considering my troubles even without
Sicca—for Tiro is better; but, as you tell me to look out that I'm not
caught, by which I am to understand you can't fix a day for the
departure I mentioned, I thought the best thing would be to go to Rome.
That I see is your opinion too. So to-morrow I shall go to Sicca's
suburban place. Then I think I will stay at your place at Ficulea, as
you suggest. The matters you have mentioned we will investigate
together, as I am coming. Your kindness, diligence and good sense both
in managing my affairs and in forming plans and suggesting them in your
letters, goes to my heart wonderfully. However, if you do anything with
Silius, even on the very day of my arrival at Sicca's place, please let
me know, especially which part he wants to withdraw. You say "the far
end." Take care that is not the very bit which, as you know, set me
thinking about the thing at all. I am sending you a letter of Hirtius',
which has just come. It is kindly expressed.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 72


                                  XXXV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. fort. in suburbano Siccae K. vesp. aut mane VI Non.
           Mai. a. 709_]

Antequam a te proxime discessi, numquam mihi venit in mentem, quo plus
insumptum in monimentum esset quam nescio quid, quod lege conceditur,
tantundem populo dandum esse. Quod non magno opere moveret, nisi nescio
quomodo, ἀλόγως fortasse nollem illud ullo nomine nisi fani appellari.
Quod si volumus, vereor, ne adsequi non possimus nisi mutato loco. Hoc
quale sit, quaeso, considera. Nam, etsi minus urgeor meque ipse prope
modum collegi, tamen indigeo tui consilii. Itaque te vehementer etiam
atque etiam rogo, magis quam a me vis aut pateris te rogari, ut hanc
cogitationem toto pectore amplectare.


                                 XXXVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae V Non. Mai. a. 709_]

Fanum fieri volo, neque hoc mihi erui potest. Sepulcri similitudinem
effugere non tam propter poenam legis studeo, quam ut maxime adsequar
ἀποθεώσιν. Quod poteram, si in ipsa villa facerem; sed, ut saepe locuti
sumus, commutationes dominorum reformido. In agro ubicumque fecero, mihi
videor adsequi posse, ut posteritas habeat religionem. Hae meae tibi
ineptiae (fateor enim) ferendae sunt; nam habeo ne me quidem ipsum,
quicum tam audacter communicem quam tecum. Sin tibi res, si locus, si
institutum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 73


                                  XXXV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _At Sicca's house, May 1 or 2_, B.C. _45_]

It never occurred to me before I left you the other day, that if
anything is spent on a monument in excess of whatever it is that the law
allows, one has to give an equal sum to the public funds. That would not
disturb me much, if it were not that somehow or other, perhaps without
any good reason, I should be sorry for it to be called anything but a
shrine. If I want that, I'm afraid I can't have it, unless I change the
site. Please consider what there is in this point. For though I am less
anxious and have almost recovered myself, still I want your advice. So I
entreat you with more urgency than you wish or allow me to use, to give
your whole mind to considering this question.


                                 XXXVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 3_, B.C. _45_]

I want it to be a shrine, and that idea cannot be rooted out of my mind.
I am anxious to avoid its being taken for a tomb, not so much on account
of the legal penalty as to get as near to deification as possible. That
would be possible, if it were in the actual house where she died; but,
as I have often said, I am afraid of its changing hands. Wherever I
build it in the open, I think I can contrive that posterity shall
respect its sanctity. You must put up with these foolish fancies of
mine, for such I confess they are; for there is no one, not even myself,
with whom I talk so freely as with you. But, if you approve of the
project, the place and

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 74

placet, lege, quaeso, legem mihique eam mitte. Si quid in mentem veniet,
quo modo eam effugere possimus, utemur.

Ad Brutum si quid scribes, nisi alienum putabis, obiurgato eum, quod in
Cumano esse noluerit propter eam causam, quam tibi dixit. Cogitanti enim
mihi nihil tam videtur potuisse facere rustice. Et, si tibi placebit sic
agere de fano, ut coepimus, velim cohortere et exacuas Cluatium. Nam,
etiamsi alio loco placebit, illius nobis opera consilioque utendum puto.
Tu ad villam fortasse cras.


                                 XXXVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae IV Non. Mai. a. 709_]

A te heri duas epistulas accepi, alteram pridie datam Hilaro, alteram
eodem die tabellario, accepique ab Aegypta liberto eodem die Piliam et
Atticam plane belle se habere. Quod mihi Bruti litteras, gratum. Ad me
quoque misit; quae litterae mihi redditae sunt tertio decimo die. Eam
ipsam ad te epistulam misi et ad eam exemplum mearum litterarum.

De fano, si nihil mihi hortorum invenis, qui quidem tibi inveniendi
sunt, si me tanti facis, quanti certe facis, valde probo rationem tuam
de Tusculano. Quamvis prudens ad cogitandum sis, sicut es, tamen, nisi
magnae curae tibi esset, ut ego consequerer id, quod magno opere vellem,
numquam ea res tibi tam belle in mentem venire potuisset. Sed nescio quo
pacto celebritatem requiro; itaque hortos mihi conficias

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 75

the plan, please read the law and send it to me. If any means of
avoiding it occurs to you, we will adopt it.

If you should be writing to Brutus and don't think it out of place,
reproach him for refusing to stay in my house at Cumae for the reason he
gave you. For when I come to think of it, I don't think he could have
done anything ruder. If you think we ought to go on with our idea about
the shrine, I should like you to speak to Cluatius and spur him on. For,
even if we decide on another place, I think we must make use of his
labour and advice. Perhaps you may be going to your country house
to-morrow.


                                 XXXVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 4_, B.C. _45_]

Yesterday I received two letters from you, one given the day before to
Hilarus, the other on the same day to a letter-carrier; and on the same
day I heard from my freedman Aegypta that Pilia and Attica are quite
well. Thanks for sending Brutus' letter. He sent one to me too, which
only reached me on the thirteenth day. I am forwarding the letter itself
and a copy of my answer.

About the shrine, if you don't get me any gardens—and you ought, if you
love me as much as I know you do—I approve highly of your scheme about
the place at Tusculum. In spite of your acute powers of thought so
bright an idea would never have come into your head, unless you had been
very anxious for me to secure what I was very much bent on having. But
somehow or other I want a public place; so you must contrive to get me
some gardens.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 76

necesse est. Maxuma est in Scapulae celebritas, propinquitas praeterea
ubi sis, ne totum diem in villa. Quare, antequam discedis, Othonem, si
Romae est, convenias pervelim. Si nihil erit, etsi tu meam stultitiam
consuesti ferre, eo tamen progrediar, uti stomachere. Drusus enim certe
vendere vult. Si ergo aliud non erit, mea[76] erit culpa, nisi emero.
Qua in re ne labar, quaeso, provide. Providendi autem una ratio est, si
quid de Scapulanis possumus. Et velim me certiorem facias, quam diu in
suburbano sis futurus.

Footnote 76:

  non erit, mea _Graevius_: erit, non mea _M_.

Apud Terentiam tam gratia opus est nobis tua quam auctoritate. Sed
facies, ut videbitur. Scio enim, si quid mea intersit, tibi maiori curae
solere esse quam mihi.


                                XXXVIIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae III Non. Mai. a. 709_]

Hirtius ad me scripsit Sex. Pompeium Corduba exisse et fugisse in
Hispaniam citeriorem, Gnaeum fugisse nescio quo; neque enim curo. Nihil
praeterea novi. Litteras Narbone dedit XIIII Kal. Maias. Tu mihi de
Canini naufragio quasi dubia misisti. Scribes igitur, si quid erit
certius. Quod me a maestitia avocas, multum levaris, si locum fano
dederis. Multa mihi εἰς ἀποθέωσιν in mentem veniunt, sed loco valde opus
est. Quare etiam Othonem vide.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 77

Scapula's are the most public, and besides they are near and one can be
there without spending the whole day in the country. So before you go
away, I should very much like you to see Otho, if he is in town. If it
comes to nothing, I shall go to such lengths as to rouse your wrath,
accustomed though you are to my folly. For Drusus certainly is willing
to sell. So, if there is nothing else, it will be my fault if I don't
buy. Pray see that I don't make any mistake about it. The only way of
making sure against that is to get some of Scapula's land, if possible.
Please let me know, too, how long you are going to be in your suburban
estate.

With Terentia her liking for you may help as much as your influence. But
do as you think fit. For I know that you are generally more solicitous
about my interests than I am myself.


                                XXXVIIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 5_, B.C. _45_]

Hirtius tells me Sextus Pompeius has quitted Cordova and fled into
Northern Spain, while Gnaeus has fled, I know not whither, nor do I
care. No other news. His letter was posted from Narbo on the 18th of
April. You mentioned Caninius' shipwreck as though it was doubtful; so
let me know, if there is any certain information. You bid me cast off
melancholy; very well, you will take a great load off my mind, if you
give me a site for the shrine. Many points occur to me in favour of
deification; but I badly want a place. So see Otho too.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 78


                                XXXVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae prid. Non. Mai. a. 709_]

Non dubito, quin occupatissimus fueris, qui ad me nihil litterarum; sed
homo nequam, qui tuum commodum non exspectarit, cum ob eam unam causam
missus esset. Nunc quidem, nisi quid te tenuit, suspicor te esse in
suburbano. At ego hic scribendo dies totos nihil equidem levor, sed
tamen aberro.

Asinius Pollio ad me scripsit de impuro nostro cognato. Quod Balbus
minor nuper satis plane, Dolabella obscure, hic apertissime. Ferrem
graviter, si novae aegrimoniae locus esset. Sed tamen ecquid impurius? O
hominem cavendum! Quamquam mihi quidem—sed tenendus dolor est. Tu,
quoniam necesse nihil est, sic scribes aliquid, si vacabis.


                                XXXVIIIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae Non. Mai. a. 709_]

Quod putas oportere pervideri iam animi mei firmitatem graviusque
quosdam scribis de me loqui quam aut te scribere aut Brutum, si, qui me
fractum esse animo et debilitatum putant, sciant, quid litterarum et
cuius generis conficiam, credo, si modo homines sint, existiment me,
sive ita levatus sim, ut animum vacuum ad res difficiles scribendas
adferam,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 79


                                XXXVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 6_, B.C. _45_]

I have no doubt you are overwhelmingly busy, as you send me no letter.
But what a scoundrel not to wait for your convenience when I sent him
for that very reason! Now I suppose you are in your suburban estate,
unless anything kept you. I sit here writing all day long, and get no
relief, though it does distract my thoughts.

Asinius Pollio has written about my blackguardly kinsman.[77] Balbus the
younger gave me a clear enough hint lately, Dolabella a vague one, and
Pollio states it quite openly. I should be annoyed, if there were any
room left for a new sorrow. But could anything be more blackguardly?
What a dangerous fellow! Though to me—— But I must restrain my feelings.
There is no necessity for you to write, only write, if you have time.

Footnote 77:

  His nephew, who had joined Caesar and was traducing him.


                                XXXVIIIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 7_, B.C. _45_]

You think there ought to be outward and visible signs of my composure of
spirit by this time, and you say some speak more severely of me than
either you or Brutus mention in your letters. If those who think my
spirit is crushed and broken knew the amount and the nature of the
literary work I am doing, I fancy, if they are human, they would hold me
guiltless. There is nothing to blame me for, if I have so far recovered
as to have my mind free to engage in difficult writing, and even
something

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 80

reprehendendum non esse, sive hanc aberrationem a dolore delegerim, quae
maxime liberalis sit doctoque homine dignissima, laudari me etiam
oportere. Sed, cum ego faciam omnia, quae facere possim ad me
adlevandum, tu effice id, quod video te non minus quam me laborare. Hoc
mihi debere videor, neque levari posse, nisi solvero aut videro me posse
solvere, id est locum, qualem velim, invenero. Heredes Scapulae si istos
hortos, ut scribis tibi Othonem dixisse, partibus quattuor factis liceri
cogitant, nihil est scilicet emptori loci; sin venibunt, quid fieri
possit, videbimus. Nam ille locus Publicianus, qui est Treboni et
Cusini, erat ad me allatus. Sed scis aream esse. Nullo pacto probo.
Clodiae sane placent, sed non puto esse venales. De Drusi hortis,
quamvis ab iis abhorreas, ut scribis, tamen eo confugiam, nisi quid
inveneris. Aedificatio me non movet. Nihil enim aliud aedificabo nisi
id, quod etiam, si illos non habuero. Κῦρος δʹ, εʹ mihi sic placuit ut
cetera Antisthenis, hominis acuti magis quam eruditi.


                                 XXXIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VIII Id. Mai. a. 709_]

Tabellarius ad me cum sine litteris tuis venisset, existimavi tibi eam
causam non scribendi fuisse, quod pridie scripsisses ea ipsa, ad quam
rescripsi, epistula.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 81

to praise me for, if I have chosen this mode of diverting my thoughts as
the most cultivated and the one most worthy of a man of learning. But,
when I am doing everything I can to cast off my sorrow, do you make an
end of what I see you are as much concerned about as myself. I regard it
as a debt and I cannot lay aside my care, till I have paid it or see
that I can pay it, that is, till I have found a suitable place. If
Scapula's heirs are thinking of dividing his garden into four parts and
bidding for them among themselves, as you say Otho has told you, then
there is no chance for a purchaser; but, if they put them up for sale,
we will see what we can do. For that place of Publicius', which now
belongs to Trebonius and Cusinius, has been offered to me; but you know
it is a mere building plot. I can't put up with it at any price.
Clodia's gardens I like, but I don't think they are for sale. Though you
dislike Drusus' gardens, I shall have to come back to them, unless you
find something. The building does not bother me. I shall only be
building what I shall build in any case, even if I don't have the
gardens. I am as pleased with "_Cyrus_, Books IV. and V." as with the
rest of Antisthenes' works, though he is ingenious rather than
learned.[78]

Footnote 78:

  Antisthenes was the founder of the Cynic School at Athens. He wrote a
  work in ten volumes, of which two, books 4 and 5, were called _Cyrus_.


                                 XXXIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 8_, B.C. _45_]

As a postman arrived without any letter from you, I inferred the reason
was what you mentioned yesterday in the letter I am answering. Still I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 82

Exspectaram tamen aliquid de litteris Asini Pollionis. Sed nimium ex meo
otio tuum specto. Quamquam tibi remitto, nisi quid necesse erit, necesse
ne habeas scribere, nisi eris valde otiosus.

De tabellariis facerem, quod suades, si essent ullae necessariae
litterae, ut erant olim, cum tamen brevioribus diebus cotidie
respondebant tempori tabellarii, et erat aliquid, Silius, Drusus, alia
quaedam. Nunc, nisi Otho exstitisset, quod scriberemus, non erat; id
ipsum dilatum est. Tamen adlevor, cum loquor tecum absens, multo etiam
magis, cum tuas litteras lego. Sed, quoniam et abes (sic enim arbitror),
et scribendi necessitas nulla est, conquiescent litterae, nisi quid novi
exstiterit.


                                   XL

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VII Id. Mai. a. 709_]

Qualis futura sit Caesaris vituperatio contra laudationem meam, perspexi
ex eo libro, quem Hirtius ad me misit; in quo colligit vitia Catonis,
sed cum maximis laudibus meis. Itaque misi librum ad Muscam, ut tuis
librariis daret. Volo enim eum divulgari; quod quo facilius fiat,
imperabis tuis.

Συμβουλευτικὸν saepe conor. Nihil reperio et quidem mecum habeo et
Ἀριστοτέλους et Θεοπόμπου libros πρὸς Ἀλέξανδρον. Sed quid simile? Illi,
et quae ipsis honesta essent, scribebant et grata Alexandro. Ecquid tu
eius modi reperis? Mihi quidem

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 83

expected something about Asinius Pollio's letter. But I am too apt to
reckon your leisure by my own. However I give you leave not to think
yourself bound to write, except in case of necessity, unless you have
plenty of leisure.

About the letter carriers I would do as you suggest, if there were any
pressing letters, as there were lately. Then, however, the carriers kept
up to their time every day, though the days were shorter, and we had
something to write about, Silius, Drusus, and other things. Now, if Otho
had not cropped up, there is nothing; and even that nothing has been
deferred. However it cheers me to talk with you when we are not
together, and still more to read your letters. But, as you are not at
home (for I think you are not), and there is no necessity to write, let
there be a truce to writing, unless some new point arises.


                                   XL

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 9_, B.C. _45_]

What sort of thing Caesar's invective against my panegyric will be, I
have seen from the book, which Hirtius has sent me. He has collected in
it all Cato's faults, but given me high praise. So I have sent the book
to Musca to pass on to your copyists; for I want it to be published. To
facilitate that, please give your men orders.

I try my hand often at an essay of advice. I can't find anything to say;
and yet I have by me Aristotle's and Theopompus' books to Alexander. But
what analogy is there? They could write what was honourable to
themselves and acceptable to Alexander. Can you find anything of that
sort?

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 84

nihil in mentem venit. Quod scribis te vereri, ne et gratia et
auctoritas nostra hoc meo maerore minuatur, ego, quid homines aut
reprehendant aut postulent, nescio. Ne doleam? Qui potest? Ne iaceam?
Quis umquam minus? Dum tua me domus levabat, quis a me exclusus? quis
venit, qui offenderet? Asturam sum a te profectus. Legere isti laeti,
qui me reprehendunt, tam multa non possunt, quam ego scripsi. Quam bene,
nihil ad rem, sed genus scribendi id fuit, quod nemo abiecto animo
facere posset. Triginta dies in hortis fui. Quis aut congressum meum aut
facilitatem sermonis desideravit? Nunc ipsum ea lego, ea scribo, ut ii,
qui mecum sunt, difficilius otium ferant quam ego laborem. Si quis
requirit, cur Romae non sim: quia discessus est; cur non sim in eis meis
praediolis, quae sunt huius temporis; quia frequentiam illam non facile
ferrem. Ibi sum igitur, ubi is, qui optimas Baias habebat, quotannis hoc
tempus consumere solebat. Cum Romam venero, nec vultu nec oratione
reprehendar. Hilaritatem illam, qua hanc tristitiam temporum
condiebamus, in perpetuum amisi, constantia et firmitas nec animi nec
orationis requiretur.

De hortis Scapulanis hoc videtur effici posse, aliud tua gratia, aliud
nostra, ut praeconi subiciantur. Id nisi fit, excludemur. Sin ad tabulam
venimus, vincemus

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 85

Nothing occurs to me. You say you are afraid my influence and my
authority will be lessened by this sorrow of mine. For my part I don't
see what people are complaining of or what they expect of me. Not to
grieve? How is that possible! Not to be prostrated? No one was ever less
prostrated. While I sought relief in your house, I was at home to every
caller; and no one, who came, felt in the way. I came to Astura straight
from you. Those cheerful friends of yours who blame me cannot read as
much as I have written. How well it is written is not to the point, but
it was a kind of writing that no one whose spirit was broken could do. I
have been thirty days in these gardens. Who has failed to get access to
me or conversation with me? At this very moment I am writing and reading
so much that the people with me find the holiday harder work than I find
working. If anyone asks why I am not in town, "because it is the
vacation": why I am not at one of my little places, where it is now the
season, "because I could not put up with the crowd of visitors." So I am
staying where the man, who prized Baiae more than anyone, always used to
spend this part of the year. When I come to Rome, they shall have
nothing to find fault with in my looks or my conversation. The
cheerfulness with which I used to temper the sadness of the times, I
have lost for ever: but there shall be no lack of courage and firmness
in my bearing or my words.

As to Scapula's gardens, it seems possible that, as a favour, partly to
you and partly to me, they may be put up at auction. If not, we are cut
out. But, if it comes to an auction, my eagerness

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 86

facultates Othonis nostra cupiditate. Nam, quod ad me de Lentulo
scribis, non est in eo. Faberiana modo res certa sit, tuque enitare,
quod facis, quod volumus, consequemur.

Quod quaeris, quam diu hic: paucos dies. Sed certum non habeo. Simul ac
constituero, ad te scribam, et tu ad me, quam diu in suburbano sis
futurus. Quo die ego ad te haec misi, de Pilia et Attica mihi quoque
eadem, quae scribis, et scribuntur et nuntiantur.


                                  XLI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae V Id. Mai. a. 709_]

Nihil erat, quod scriberem. Scire tamen volebam, ubi esses; si abes aut
afuturus es, quando rediturus esses. Facies igitur certiorem. Et, quod
tu scire volebas, ego quando ex hoc loco, postridie Idus Lanuvi
constitui manere, inde postridie in Tusculano aut Romae. Utrum sim
facturus, eo ipso die scies.

Scis, quam sit φιλαίτιον συμφορά, minime in te quidem, sed tamen avide
sum adfectus de fano, quod nisi non dico effectum erit, sed fieri videro
(audebo hoc dicere, et tu, ut soles, accipies), incursabit in te dolor
meus, non iure ille quidem, sed tamen feres hoc ipsum, quod scribo, ut
omnia mea fers ac tulisti. Omnes tuas consolationes unam hanc in rem
velim conferas. Si quaeris, quid optem, primum Scapulae,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 87

for them will conquer Otho's purse. For as to what you say about
Lentulus, he can't run to it. If only the business with Faberius is
settled and you make an effort, as you are doing, we shall get what we
want.

You ask how long I am staying here: only a few days. But I am not
certain. As soon as I have made up my mind, I will write to you: and do
you write to me how long you are staying in your estate. On the day on
which I am sending this I too got the news you send me about Pilia and
Attica by letter and by word of mouth.


                                  XLI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 11_, B.C. _45_]

I have nothing to write. But I want to know, where you are; and, if you
are away or are going away, when you will return. So please send me
word. You wanted to know, when I am leaving here: I have made up my mind
to stay at Lanuvium on the 16th, and then at Tusculum or at Rome on the
next day. Which I am going to do, you shall know on the day itself.

You know how full of grievances misfortune makes one. I have none
against you; but still I have a hungry longing for the shrine. I will
venture to say so much, and you must take it as you usually do, that
unless I see it being built, I don't say finished, my resentment will
redound on you, quite unjustly, but you will put up with what I am
saying, as you put up with all my moods and always have put up with
them. I wish you would confine your attempts at consolation to that one
point. If you want to know my wishes, I choose Scapula's place

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 88

deinde Clodiae, postea, si Silius nolet, Drusus aget iniuste, Cusini et
Treboni. Puto tertium esse dominum, Rebilum fuisse certo scio. Sin autem
tibi Tusculanum placet, ut significasti quibusdam litteris, tibi
adsentiar. Hoc quidem utique perficies, si me levari vis, quem iam etiam
gravius accusas, quam patitur tua consuetudo, sed facis summo amore et
victus fortasse vitio meo. Sed tamen, si me levari vis, haec est summa
levatio vel, si verum scire vis, una.

Hirti epistulam si legeris, quae mihi quasi πρόπλασμα videtur eius
vituperationis, quam Caesar scripsit de Catone, facies me, quid tibi
visum sit, si tibi erit commodum, certiorem. Redeo ad fanum. Nisi hac
aestate absolutum erit, quam vides integram restare, scelere me
liberatum non putabo.


                                  XLII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VI Id. Mai. a. 709_]

Nullum a te desideravi diem litterarum; videbam enim, quae scribis, et
tamen suspicabar vel potius intellegebam nihil fuisse, quod scriberes;
a. d. VI Idus vero et abesse te putabam et plane videbam nihil te
habere. Ego tamen ad te fere cotidie mittam; malo enim frustra, quam te
non habere, cui des, si quid forte sit, quod putes me scire oportere.
Itaque accepi VI Idus litteras tuas inanes. Quid enim habebas, quod
scriberes? Mi tamen illud, quicquid erat,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 89

first, and then Clodia's: after them, if Silius won't agree and Drusus
acts unfairly, Cusinius' and Trebonius' property. I think there is a
third owner: I know for certain that Rebilus was one. If however you
prefer my place at Tusculum, as you hinted in a letter, I will agree.
Get the thing finished somehow, if you want to see me consoled. You are
blaming me already more severely than is your wont, but you do it most
affectionately, and I suppose it is my fault for making you do so.
However, if you wish to see me consoled, this is the best consolation,
or rather, to tell the truth, the only one.

If you have read Hirtius' letter, which seems to me a sort of first
sketch of the tirade Caesar has written against Cato, let me know what
you think of it, if you can. I return to the shrine. If it is not
finished this summer (and we have the whole summer before us), I shall
not think myself free from guilt.


                                  XLII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 10_, B.C. _45_]

I have never asked you to fix a regular day for your letters: for I see
the point you mention, and yet I suspect or rather I know there was
nothing for you to write. On the 10th indeed I think you were away, and
I am quite aware you have no news. However I shall write to you nearly
every day: for I prefer to send letters to no purpose rather than for
you to have no messenger to give one to, if there should be anything you
think I ought to know. So on the 10th I got your letter with nothing in
it. For what was there for you to put in it? However, the little

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 90

non molestum fuit, ut nihil aliud, scire me novi te nihil habere.

Scripsisti tamen nescio quid de Clodia. Ubi ergo ea est aut quando
ventura? Placet mihi res sic, ut secundum Othonem nihil magis. Sed neque
hanc vendituram puto (delectatur enim et copiosa est), et, illud alterum
quam sit difficile, te non fugit. Sed, obsecro, enitamur, ut aliquid ad
id, quod cupio, excogitemus.

Ego me hinc postridie Id. exiturum puto, sed aut in Tusculanum aut
domum, inde fortasse Arpinum. Cum certum sciero, scribam ad te.


                                 XLIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae IV Id. Mai. a. 709_]

Venerat mihi in mentem monere te, ut id ipsum, quod facis, faceres.
Putabam enim commodius te idem istud domi agere posse interpellatione
sublata.

Ego postridie Idus, ut scripsi ad te ante, Lanuvi manere constitui, inde
aut Romae aut in Tusculano; scies ante, utrum. Quod scribis[79] recte
illam rem fore levamento, bene facis, tamen id est[80] mihi crede
perinde, ut existimare tu non potes. Res indicat quanto opere id cupiam,
cum tibi audeam confiteri, quem id non ita valde probare arbitrer. Sed
ferendus tibi in hoc meus error. Ferendus? immo vero etiam adiuvandus.
De Othone diffido, fortasse quia cupio. Sed tamen maior etiam res est
quam facilitates nostrae,

Footnote 79:

  scribis _Boot_: scies _M_.

Footnote 80:

  tamen id est _Wesenberg_: cum id esse _M_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 91

there was, was pleasant to me: if nothing else, it taught me you had no
news.

But you say something or other about Clodia. Where is she then or when
is she coming? I prefer her grounds to anyone's except Otho's. But I
don't think she will sell: she likes the place and has plenty of money:
and how difficult the other thing is, you are well aware. But pray let
us make an effort to think out some way of getting what I want.

I think of leaving here on the 16th; but either for Tusculum or for
Rome, and then on perhaps to Arpinum. When I know for certain, I will
write.


                                 XLIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 12_, B.C. _45_]

It had occurred to me to advise you to do exactly what you are doing.
For I thought you could get that particular business over more
conveniently at home without any fear of interruption.

As I said before, I intend to stop at Lanuvium on the 16th, and then
either at Rome or Tusculum. You shall know in advance which. You are
right in saying that will lighten my sorrow, but believe me it will do
so to an extent which you cannot imagine. How eagerly I desire it you
can judge from my daring to confess it to you, though I think you do not
very much approve of it. But you must bear with my aberration. Bear with
it? Nay you must help me in it. I have doubts about Otho, perhaps
because I am eager for his place. But anyhow the property is beyond my
means, especially

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 92

praesertim adversario et cupido et locuplete et herede. Proximum est, ut
velim Clodiae. Sed, si ista minus confici possunt, effice quidvis. Ego
me maiore religione, quam quisquam fuit ullius voti, obstrictum puto.
Videbis etiam Trebonianos, etsi absunt domini. Sed, ut ad te heri
scripsi, considerabis etiam de Tusculano, ne aestas effluat; quod certe
non est committendum.


                                  XLIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae III Id. Mai. a. 709_]

Et Hirtium aliquid ad te συμπαθῶς de me scripsisse facile patior (fecit
enim humane) et te eius epistulam ad me non misisse multo facilius; tu
enim etiam humanius. Illius librum, quem ad me misit de Catone,
propterea volo divulgari a tuis, ut ex istorum vituperatione sit illius
maior laudatio.

Quod per Mustelam agis, habes hominem valde idoneum meique sane
studiosum iam inde a Pontiano. Perfice igitur aliquid. Quid autem aliud,
nisi ut aditus sit emptori? quod per quemvis heredem potest effici. Sed
Mustelam id perfecturum, si rogaris, puto. Mihi vero et locum, quem
opto, ad id, quod volumus, dederis et praeterea ἐγγήραμα. Nam illa Sili
et Drusi non satis οἰκοδεσποτικὰ mihi videntur. Quid enim? sedere totos
dies in villa? Ista igitur malim, primum Othonis, deinde Clodiae. Si
nihil fiet, aut Druso ludus est suggerendus aut utendum Tusculano.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 93

when we have to bid against a man, who is eager for the place, wealthy
and one of his heirs. What I should prefer after that is Clodia's. But,
if nothing can be done about those, do anything. I count myself more
bound by sacred obligation than anyone ever was by any vow. Look into
Trebonius' place too, though the owners are away. But, as I wrote
yesterday, consider my Tusculan place too, that the summer may not slip
away. That certainly must not happen.


                                  XLIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 13_, B.C. _45_]

I am not at all annoyed that Hirtius wrote to you about me in a
sympathetic tone (he was acting kindly), and still less at your not
sending his letter to me, in which you were acting even more kindly. The
reason why I want your copyists to circulate the book he sent me about
Cato, is that their abuse may enhance Cato's reputation.

You say you are negotiating through Mustela. He is a very suitable
person and very devoted to me since the affair of Pontianus. So get
something settled. But what is wanted except an opening for a purchaser?
And that could be got through any of the heirs. But I think Mustela will
manage that, if you ask him. You will have provided me not only with the
very place I want for my purpose, but a place to grow old in besides.
For Silius' and Drusus' places don't seem to me quite fit for a
paterfamilias. Why, I should have to spend whole days in the country
house. So I prefer the others, Otho's first and then Clodia's. If
nothing comes of it, then we must play a trick on Drusus or fall back on
the place at Tusculum.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 94

Quod domi te inclusisti, ratione fecisti; sed, quaeso, confice et te
vacuum redde nobis. Ego hinc, ut scripsi antea, postridie Idus Lanuvi,
deinde postridie in Tusculano. Contudi enim animum et fortasse vici, si
modo permansero. Scies igitur fortasse eras, summum perendie.

Sed quid est, quaeso? Philotimus nec Carteiae Pompeium teneri (qua de re
litterarum ad Clodium Patavinum missarum exemplum mihi Oppius et Balbus
miserant, se id factum arbitrari) bellumque narrat reliquum satis
magnum. Solet omnino esse Fulviniaster. Sed tamen, si quid habes. Volo
etiam de naufragio Caniniano scire quid sit.

Ego hic duo magna συντάγματα absolvi; nullo enim alio modo a miseria
quasi aberrare possum. Tu mihi, etiamsi nihil erit, quod scribas, quod
fore ita video, tamen id ipsum scribas velim, te nihil habuisse, quod
scriberes, dum modo ne his verbis.


                                  XLV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XVI K. Iun. a. 709_]

De Attica optime. Ἀκηδία tua me movet, etsi scribis nihil esse. In
Tusculano eo commodius ero, quod et crebrius tuas litteras accipiam et
te ipsum non numquam videbo; nam ceteroqui ἀνεκτότερα erant Asturae. Nec
haec, quae refricant, hic me magis

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 95

You have done wisely in shutting yourself up at home. But please get
your business over and let me find you with some leisure again. As I
said before, I am going from here to Lanuvium on the 16th, then on the
17th to Tusculum. For I have crushed down my feelings and perhaps have
conquered them, if only it will last. So you shall hear to-morrow
perhaps, at the latest the day after.

But what is this, pray? Philotimus says Pompey is not shut in at Carteia
(about that Oppius and Balbus had sent me a copy of a letter to Clodius
of Patavium, saying they thought he was) and that there is quite an
important war yet to come. Of course he always is a parody of
Fulvinius.[81] However have you any news? I want to know the facts about
the shipwreck of Caninius too.

Footnote 81:

  Of Fulvinius nothing is known, save what is inferred from this
  passage, that he was a person given to spreading false reports.

I have finished two large treatises[82] here. It was the only way I
could get away from my misery. As for you, even if you have nothing to
write, which I think will be the case, write and tell me that you have
nothing to say, provided you don't use those very words.

Footnote 82:

  The _Academica_ and _De Finibus_, unless, as Reid suggests, the
  _Academica_ alone is meant, as that was originally divided into two
  books.


                                  XLV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 17_, B.C. _45_]

That's good news about Attica. I am worried about your listlessness,
though you say it is nothing. I shall find Tusculum more convenient, as
I shall get letters from you more frequently and see you yourself at
times: for in other respects things were more endurable at Astura. My
feelings are not

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 96

angunt; etsi tamen, ubicumque sum, illa sunt mecum. De Caesare vicino
scripseram ad te, quia cognoram ex tuis litteris. Eum σύνναον Quirini
malo quam Salutis. Tu vero pervulga Hirtium. Id enim ipsum putaram, quod
scribis, ut, cum ingenium amici nostri probaretur, ὑπόθεσις vituperandi
Catonis irrideretur.


                                  XLVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae Id. Mai. a. 709_]

Vincam, opinor, animum et Lanuvio pergam in Tusculanum. Aut enim mihi in
perpetuum fundo illo carendum est (nam dolor idem manebit, tantum modo
occultius), aut nescio, quid intersit, utrum illuc nunc veniam an ad
decem annos. Neque enim ista maior admonitio, quam quibus adsidue
conficior et dies et noctes. "Quid ergo?" inquies, "nihil litterae?" In
hac quidem re vereor ne etiam contra; nam essem fortasse durior. Exculto
enim animo nihil agreste, nihil inhumanum est.

Tu igitur, ut scripsisti, nec id incommodo tuo. Vel binae enim poterunt
litterae. Occurram etiam, si necesse erit. Ergo id quidem, ut poteris.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 97

more harrowed by galling memories here than there; though to be sure,
wherever I am, they are with me. I wrote to you about your "neighbour"
Caesar, because I learned about it from your letters. I would rather see
him sharing the temple of Quirinus than of Safety.[83] Yes, publish
Hirtius' book. I thought the same as you say, that our friend's talent
was shown by it, while its object, blackening Cato's character, only
looked ridiculous.

Footnote 83:

  A statue of Caesar with the inscription _Deo Invicto_ had been put
  recently in the temple of Quirinus on the Quirinal hill, which he had
  restored after its destruction by fire in 49 B.C. Atticus' house and
  the temple of Salus were also on the Quirinal.


                                  XLVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, May 15_, B.C. _45_]

I think I shall conquer my feelings and go from Lanuvium to Tusculum.
For I must either give up that estate for ever (for my grief will remain
the same, only less visible), or it does not matter a straw whether I go
there now or ten years hence. The place will not remind me of her any
more than the thoughts that harass me day and night. "Oh!" you will say,
"so books do not help." In this respect I am afraid they make it worse:
perhaps I should have been braver without. For in a cultivated mind
there is no roughness and no insensibility.

So you will come to me as you said, and only that if convenient. A
letter apiece will be enough. I will even come to meet you, if
necessary. So that shall be as you find possible.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 98


                                 XLVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Lanuvi XVII K. Iun. a. 709_]

De Mustela, ut scribis, etsi magnum opus est. Eo magis delabor ad
Clodiam. Quamquam in utroque Faberianum nomen explorandum est. De quo
nihil nocuerit si aliquid cum Balbo eris locutus, et quidem, ut res est,
emere nos velle, nee posse sine isto nomine, nec audere re incerta. Sed
quando Clodia Romae futura est, et quanti rem aestimas? Eo prorsus
specto, non quin illud malim, sed et magna res est et difficile certamen
cum cupido, cum locuplete, cum herede. Etsi de cupiditate nemini
concedam; ceteris rebus inferiores sumus. Sed haec coram.


                                 XLVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Lanuvi XVI K. Iun. mane a. 709_]

Hirti librum, ut facis, divulga. De Philotimo idem et ego arbitrabar.
Domum tuam pluris video futuram vicino Caesare. Tabellarium meum hodie
exspectamus. Nos de Pilia et Attica certiores faciet.

Domi te libenter esse facile credo. Sed velim scire, quid tibi restet,
aut iamne confeceris. Ego te in Tusculano exspecto, eoque magis, quod
Tironi statim te venturum scripsisti et addidisti te putare opus esse.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 99


                                 XLVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Lanuvium, May 16_, B.C. _45_]

About Mustela, do as you say, though it will be a big business. For that
reason I incline more to Clodia; though in both cases we must find out
about Faberius' debt. There will be no harm in your speaking to Balbus
about it and telling him, what is the truth, that we want to buy, but
cannot without getting in that debt, and dare not, until something is
settled. But when is Clodia going to be in Rome, and how much do you
think it will cost? Why I turn my thoughts to it is not that I should
not prefer the other, but it is a big venture and it is difficult to
contend with one who is eager for it, rich and one of the heirs. As far
as eagerness goes, I yield to no one, but in the other respects we are
worse off. However of this when we meet.


                                 XLVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Lanuvium, May 17_, B.C. _45_]

Go on publishing Hirtius' book. About Philotimus I agree with you. I see
your house will go up in value now you have Caesar for a neighbour. I am
expecting my messenger to-day. He will tell me about Pilia and Attica.

I can easily believe you are glad to be at home: but I should like to
know what business you still have or if you have finished now. I am
expecting you at Tusculum, especially as you told Tiro you were coming
at once, adding that you thought it necessary.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 100


                                  XLIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XIV K. Iun. a. 709_]

Sentiebam omnino, quantum mihi praesens prodesses, sed multo magis post
discessum tuum sentio. Quam ob rem, ut ante ad te scripsi, aut ego ad te
totus aut tu ad me, quod licebit.

Heri non multo post, quam tu a me discessisti, puto, quidam urbani, ut
videbantur, ad me mandata et litteras attulerunt a. C. Mario C. f. C. n.
multis verbis "agere mecum per cognationem, quae mihi secum esset, per
eum Marium, quem scripsissem, per eloquentiam L. Crassi, avi sui, ut se
defenderem," causamque suam mihi perscripsit. Rescripsi patrono illi
nihil opus esse, quondam Caesaris, propinqui eius, omnis potestas esset,
viri optimi et hominis liberalissimi; me tamen ei fauturum. O tempora!
fore, cum dubitet Curtius consulatum petere! Sed haec hactenus.

De Tirone mihi curae est. Sed iam sciam, quid agat. Heri enim misi, qui
videret; cui etiam ad te litteras dedi. Epistulam ad Ciceronem tibi
misi. Horti quam in diem proscripti sint, velim ad me scribas.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 101


                                  XLIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 19_, B.C. _45_]

I felt all the time how much good your presence was doing me: but I feel
it still more since you have gone. So, as I wrote to you before, either
I must come to you entirely or you to me, according as it can be
managed.

Yesterday, soon after your departure, I think, some people, who looked
like city men, brought me a message and a letter from Gaius Marius, son
and grandson of Gaius.[84] He begged me in the name of our relationship,
in the name of Marius, on whom I had written, and by the eloquence of
his grandfather, L. Crassus, to defend him: and he stated his case in
full. I wrote back that he had no need of an advocate since his relative
Caesar was omnipotent, and he was the best and most liberal of men: but
I would support him. What times these are! To think of Curtius wondering
whether to stand for the consulship. But enough of this.

Footnote 84:

  An impostor named Amatias or Herophilus. He was a veterinary surgeon,
  and was put to death by Antony after he had set up a column in the
  forum in Caesar's memory. Marius married Julia, aunt of Caesar; their
  son was adopted by Gratidia, grandmother of Cicero, and married a
  daughter of L. Crassus, the orator. Hence the claims of relationship
  asserted in this letter.

I am anxious about Tiro. But I shall know soon how he is, for yesterday
I sent a man to see, and I gave him a letter to you too. I have sent you
a letter for my son. Please tell me for what day the sale of the gardens
is advertised.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 102


                                   L

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XV K. Iun. a. 709_]

Ut me levarat tuus adventus, sic discessus adflixit. Quare, cum poteris,
id est cum Sexti auctioni operam dederis, revises nos. Vel unus dies
mihi erit utilis, quid dicam "gratus"? Ipse Romam venirem, ut una
essemus, si satis consultum quadam de re haberem.


                                   LI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XIII K. Iun. a. 709_]

Tironem habeo citius, quam verebar. Venit etiam Nicias, et Valerium
hodie audiebam esse venturum. Quamvis multi sint, magis tamen ero solus,
quam si unus esses. Sed exspecto te, a Peducaeo utique, tu autem
significas aliquid etiam ante. Verum id quidem, ut poteris.

De Vergilio, ut scribis. Hoc tamen velim scire, quando auctio. Epistulam
ad Caesarem mitti video tibi placere. Quid quaeris? mihi quoque hoc idem
maxime placuit, et eo magis, quod nihil est in ea nisi optimi civis, sed
ita optimi, ut tempora; quibus parere omnes πολιτικοὶ praecipiunt. Sed
scis ita nobis esse visum, ut isti ante legerent. Tu igitur id curabis.
Sed, nisi plane iis intelleges placere, mittenda non est. Id autem utrum
illi sentiant anne simulent, tu intelleges. Mihi simulatio pro
repudiatione fuerit. Τοῦτο δὲ μηλώσῃ.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 103


                                   L

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 18_, B.C. _45_]

Your departure has depressed me as much as your arrival cheered me. So,
when you can, that is after you have attended Sextus' auction, visit me
again. Even a single day will do me good, not to speak of the pleasure.
I would come to Rome that we might be together, if I could make up my
mind satisfactorily on a certain point.


                                   LI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 20_, B.C. _45_]

I have Tiro back with me earlier than I expected. Nicias has come too
and to-day I hear Valerius is coming. However many come, I shall be more
lonely than if you alone were here. But I expect you, at any rate after
you've finished with Peducaeus; and you give some hint of an even
earlier date. But let that be as you can.

For Vergilius, as you say. I should however like to know when the
auction is. I see you think the letter ought to be sent to Caesar. Well,
I thought so too very strongly, especially as there is nothing in it
that the most loyal of citizens might not have written; loyal, that is
to say, in the present circumstances, to which all politicians tell us
we should bow. But you know I thought your Caesarian friends ought to
read it first: so you must see to that. But, unless you feel sure they
approve of it, it must not be sent. You will know whether they really
think so or are pretending. I shall count pretence as rejection. You
must probe that point.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 104

De Caerellia quid tibi placeret, Tiro mihi narravit; debere non esse
dignitatis meae, perscriptionem tibi placere:

               "Hoc métuere, alterum ín metu non pónere."

Sed et haec et multa alia coram. Sustinenda tamen, si tibi videbitur,
solutio est nominis Caerelliani, dum et de Metone et de Faberio sciamus.


                                  LII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XII K. Iun. a. 709_]

L. Tullium Montanum nosti, qui cum Cicerone profectus est. Ab eius
sororis viro litteras accepi Montanum Planco debere, quod praes pro
Flaminio sit, HS ¯XX¯; de ea re nescio quid te a Montano rogatum. Sane
velim, sive Plancus est rogandus, sive qua re potes illum iuvare, iuves.
Pertinet ad nostrum officium. Si res tibi forte notior est quam mihi,
aut si Plancum rogandum putas, scribas ad me velim, ut, quid rei sit et
quid rogandum, sciam. De epistula ad Caesarem quid egeris, exspecto. De
Silio non ita sane laboro. Tu mi aut Scapulanos aut Clodianos efficias
necesse est. Sed nescio quid videris dubitare de Clodia; utrum quando
veniat, an sintne venales? Sed quid est, quod audio Spintherem fecisse
divortium?

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 105

Tiro has told me what you think about Caerellia: that it ill suits my
dignity to be in debt, and that I should give a note of hand,

  "That you should fear the one and hold the other safe!"

But of this, and much else, when we meet. However, we must hold over the
debt to Caerellia, if you agree, till we know about Meton and Faberius.


                                  LII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 21_, B.C. _45_]

You know L. Tullius Montanus who has gone with my son. I have received a
letter from his sister's husband saying that, through going bail for
Flaminius, Montanus owes Plancus nearly £200;[85] and that he has made
some request to you about it. I should like you to assist him by
speaking to Plancus or in any other way you can. I feel under an
obligation to help him. If you know more about it than I do, or if you
think Plancus should be spoken to, I wish you would write to me, that I
may know how the matter stands, and what I ought to ask him. I am
awaiting news as to what you have done about the letter to Caesar. About
Silius I am not much concerned. You must get me either Scapula's or
Clodia's gardens. But you seem to have some doubts about Clodia. Is it
about the date of her arrival or as to whether the gardens are for sale?
But what is this that I hear about Spinther divorcing his wife?

Footnote 85:

  20,000 sesterces.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 106

De lingua Latina securi es animi. Dices: "Qui talia conscribis?"
Ἀπόγραφα sunt, minore labore fiunt; verba tantum adfero, quibus abundo.


                                  LIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XI K. Iun. a. 709_]

Ego, etsi nihil habeo, quod ad te scribam, scribo tamen, quia tecum
loqui videor. Hic nobiscum sunt Nicias et Valerius. Hodie tuas litteras
exspectabamus matutinas. Erunt fortasse alterae posmeridianae, nisi te
Epiroticae litterae impedient; quas ego non interpello. Misi ad te
epistulas ad Marcianum et ad Montanum. Eas in eundem fasciculum velim
addas, nisi forte iam dedisti.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 107

Make your mind easy about the Latin language. You will say, "What, when
you write on such subjects?"[86] They are copies, and don't give me much
trouble. I only supply words, and of them I have plenty.

Footnote 86:

  Atticus had commented on the difficulty of rendering Greek philosophic
  terms in Latin.


                                  LIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 22_, B.C. _45_]

Though I have nothing to say to you, I write all the same, because I
feel as though I were talking to you. Nicias and Valerius are here with
me. I am expecting a letter from you early to-day. Perhaps there will be
another in the afternoon, unless your letter to Epirus hinders you: I
don't want to interrupt that. I have sent you letters for Marcianus and
for Montanus. Please put them in the same packet, unless you have sent
it off already.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 108




                           M. TULLI CICERONIS
                         EPISTULARUM AD ATTICUM
                         LIBER TERTIUS DECIMUS


                                   I

                             CICERO ATTICO.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano X K. Iun. a. 709_]

Ad Ciceronem ita scripsisti, ut neque severius neque temperatius scribi
potuerit, nec magis quem ad modum ego maxime vellem; prudentissime etiam
ad Tullios. Quare aut ista proficient, aut aliud agamus. De pecunia vero
video a te omnem diligentiam adhiberi vel potius iam adhibitam esse.
Quod si efficis, a te hortos habebo. Nec vero ullum genus possessionis
est, quod malim, maxime scilicet ob eam causam, quae suscepta est; cuius
festinationem mihi tollis, quoniam de aestate polliceris vel potius
recipis. Deinde etiam ad καταβίωσιν maestitiamque minuendam nihil mihi
reperiri potest aptius; cuius rei cupiditas impellit me interdum, ut te
hortari velim. Sed me ipse revoco; non enim dubito, quin, quod me valde
velle putes, in eo tu me ipsum cupiditate vincas. Itaque istuc iam pro
facto habeo.

Exspecto, quid istis placeat de epistula ad Caesarem. Nicias te, ut
debet, amat vehementerque tua sui memoria delectatur. Ego vero Peducaeum
nostrum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 109




                            CICERO'S LETTERS
                               TO ATTICUS
                               BOOK XIII


                                   I

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 23_, B.C. _45_]

You used just the right amount of severity and of moderation in your
letter to my son, and it was exactly as I should have wished it to be.
Your notes, too, to the Tullii[87] were full of good advice. So either
those letters will set things right or we shall have to try some other
means. As to the money, I see you are making every effort, or rather you
have done so already. If you manage it, I shall owe the gardens to you.
Indeed, there is no other kind of property I should prefer, especially
for the matter I have in hand. You remove my impatience by your promise,
or rather your pledge, about the summer. There is nothing either that
could be found more likely to solace my declining years and my sorrow.
My eagerness for it impels me at times to urge you to haste. But I
restrain myself, for I have no doubt that, as you know I want it very
much, your eagerness more than equals mine. So I count the matter as
already settled.

Footnote 87:

  L. Tullius Montanus and M. Tullius Marcianus, who were at Athens with
  Cicero's son.

I am waiting to hear what your friends decide about the letter to
Caesar. Nicias is as devoted to you, as he ought to be, and is highly
delighted at your remembering him. I am extremely fond of

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 110

vehementer diligo; nam et, quanti patrem feci, totum in hunc et ipsum
per se aeque amo atque illum amavi, te vero plurimum, qui hoc ab utroque
nostrum fieri velis. Si hortos inspexeris, et si de epistula certiorem
me feceris, dederis mihi, quod ad te scribam; si minus, scribam tamen
aliquid. Numquam enim derit.


                                   II

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IX K. Iun. a. 709_]

Gratior mihi celeritas tua quam ipsa res. Quid enim indignius? Sed iam
ad ista obduruimus et humanitatem omnem exuimus. Tuas litteras hodie
exspectabam, nihil equidem ut ex iis novi; quid enim? verum tamen ——.


                                  IIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VI K. Iun. a. 709_]

Oppio et Balbo epistulas deferri iubebis et tamen Pisonem sicubi de
auro. Faberius si venerit, videbis, ut tantum attribuatur, si modo
attribuetur, quantum debetur. Accipies ab Erote.

Ariarathes, Ariobarzani filius, Romam venit. Vult, opinor, regnum
aliquod emere a Caesare; nam, quo modo nunc est, pedem ubi ponat in suo,
non habet. Omnino eum Sestius noster, parochus publicus, occupavit; quod
quidem facile patior. Verum tamen,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 111

Peducaeus; for all I felt for his father I have given to him, and I love
him for himself as much as I loved his father; and you most of all for
trying to promote this feeling between us. If you see the gardens, and
if you let me know about the letter, you will supply me with something
to write about; but, anyhow, I will write something. For there will
always be something to say.


                                   II

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 24_, B.C. _45_]

Your promptitude was more pleasing to me than the news you sent. For
what could be more insulting? However I have hardened myself to insult,
and put off all human feeling. I am looking forward to your letter
to-day, not that I expect any news. What could there be? However ——.


                                  IIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 27_, B.C. _45_]

Please have the letters sent to Balbus and Oppius, and anyhow speak to
Piso about the gold when you can. If Faberius comes, see that the right
amount of the debt is put to my credit, if anything is. Eros will tell
you about it.

Ariarathes, son of Ariobarzanes, has come to Rome, I suppose he wants to
buy some kingdom from Caesar: for, as things are at present, he cannot
set foot in his own. Our friend Sestius, in his character of public
host, has monopolized him; and I am not sorry for it. However, as I am
intimate with

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 112

quod mihi summo beneficio meo magna cum fratribus illius necessitudo
est, invito eum per litteras, ut apud me deversetur. Ad eam rem cum
mitterem Alexandrum, has ei dedi litteras.


                                  IIb

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV K. Iun. a. 709_]

Cras igitur auctio Peducaei. Cum poteris ergo. Etsi impediet fortasse
Faberius. Sed tamen cum licebit. Dionysius noster graviter queritur et
tamen iure a discipulis abesse se tam diu. Multis verbis scripsit ad me,
credo item ad te. Mihi quidem videtur etiam diutius afuturus. Ac nollem;
valde enim hominem desidero.

A te litteras exspectabam, nondum scilicet; nam has mane rescribebam.


                                  III

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano III K. Iun. a. 709_]

Ego vero ista nomina sic probo, ut nihil aliud me moveat, nisi quod tu
videris dubitare. Illud enim non accipio in bonam partem, quod ad me
refers; qui, si[88] ipse negotium meum gererem, nihil gererem[89] nisi
consilio tuo. Sed tamen intellego magis te id facere diligentia, qua
semper uteris, quam quod dubites de nominibus istis. Etenim Caelium non
probas,

Footnote 88:

  qui si» quid Δ.

Footnote 89:

  nihil gererem _omitted by_ Δ.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 113

his brothers on account of the great service I rendered them, I am
sending a letter to invite him to stay at my house. As I was sending
Alexander with it, I gave him this letter.


                                  IIb

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 29_, B.C. _45_]

So to-morrow is Peducaeus' auction. Come[90] when you can, then. But
perhaps Faberius will prevent you. However, when you can manage it. Our
friend Dionysius is complaining loudly at being so long away from his
pupils, and there is some justice in his complaint. He has written a
long letter to me, and I expect to you too. I think he will be away for
some time still: and I am sorry, for I miss him very much.

Footnote 90:

  Or, as Shuckburgh, "buy."

I am expecting a letter from you, but not yet, as I am writing in the
early morning.


                                  III

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 30_, B.C. _45_]

For my part I am so satisfied with the debtors you mention, that the
only thing which disquiets me is that you seem to have doubts. For I
don't take it at all kindly of you to refer the matter to me. If I
managed my own business, I should never manage anything without your
advice. However, I know you did it more from your usual carefulness than
because you had any doubts about the debtors. The fact is you don't
approve of Caelius and you don't

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 114

plura non vis. Utrumque laudo. His igitur utendum est. Praes[91]
aliquando factus esses[92] in his quidem tabulis. A me igitur omnia.
Quod dies longior est, teneamus modo, quod volumus, puto fore istam
etiam a praecone diem, certe ab heredibus.

Footnote 91:

  est. Praes _C_: espraes _M_.

Footnote 92:

  esses _Bosius_: esset _M_: es et _CZ_^l.

De Crispo et Mustela videbis, et velim scire, quae sit pars duorum. De
Bruti adventu eram factus certior. Attulerat enim ab eo Aegypta libertus
litteras. Misi ad te epistulam, quia commode scripta erat.


                                   IV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano K. Iun. a. 709_]

Habeo munus a te elaboratum decem legatorum. Et quidem de Tuditano
idem[93] puto. Nam filius anno post quaestor fuit quam consul Mummius.
Sed, quoniam saepius de nominibus quaeris quid placeat, ego quoque tibi
saepius respondeo placere. Si quid poteris, cum Pisone conficies; Avius
enim videtur in officio futurus. Velim ante possis; si minus, utique
simul simus, cum Brutus veniet in Tusculanum. Magni interest mea una nos
esse. Scies autem, qui dies is futurus sit, si puero negotium dederis,
ut quaerat.

Footnote 93:

  de Tuditano idem _added by Lehmann_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 115

like to increase their number.[94] I agree with you in both points. So
we must make the best of them as they are. Sometime you would have had
to go bail for me even in this sale.[95] So now I shall pay in full
myself. As to the delay in collecting the money, if only I get what I
want, I think I can arrange for delay with the auctioneer or at any rate
with the heirs.

Footnote 94:

  Apparently Faberius had offered to make over a number of debts due to
  him in payment of his debt to Cicero, with an alternative of a large
  debt from Caelius or smaller ones from several other debtors.

Footnote 95:

  _i.e._ even in the purchase of the gardens for Tullia's shrine, of
  which Atticus disapproved. But the reading may be corrupt.

See about Crispus and Mustela, and I should like to know what the share
of the two is. I had heard already of Brutus' arrival, for my freedman
Aegypta had brought me a letter from him. I have sent it to you, as it
is obligingly written.


                                   IV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 1_, B.C. _45_]

I have received your piece of work about the ten ambassadors: and I
agree with you about Tuditanus. For the son was quaestor in the year
after Mummius was consul.[96] But, as you keep on asking if I am
satisfied about the debtors, I too keep on answering that I am. Arrange
something with Piso if you can: for I think Avius will do his duty. I
wish you could come first; but, if you can't, at any rate be with me,
when Brutus comes here. It is of great importance to me that we should
be together. You will be able to ascertain the day, if you commission a
servant to find out.

Footnote 96:

  145 B.C.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 116


                                   V

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV Non. Iun. a. 709_]

Sp. Mummium putaram in decem legatis fuisse, sed videlicet (etenim
εὔλογον) fratri fuisse. Fuit enim ad Corinthum. Misi tibi Torquatum.
Colloquere tu quidem cum Silio, ut scribis, et urgue. Illam diem negabat
esse mense Maio, istam non negabat. Sed tu ut omnia istuc quoque ages
diligenter. De Crispo et Mustela scilicet, cum quid egeris. Quoniam ad
Bruti adventum fore te nobiscum polliceris, satis est, praesertim cum hi
tibi dies in magno nostro negotio consumantur.


                                   VI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae med. m. Mart., ut videtur, a. 709_]

De aquae ductu probe fecisti. Columnarium vide ne nullum debeamus;
quamquam mihi videor audisse a Camillo commutatam esse legem. Pisoni
quid est quod honestius respondere possimus quam solitudinem Catonis?
Nec de[97] coheredibus solum Herennianis, sed etiam, ut scis (tu enim
mecum egisti), de puero Lucullo, quam pecuniam tutor (nam hoc quoque ad
rem pertinet) in Achaia sumpserat. Sed agit liberaliter, quoniam negat
se quicquam facturum contra nostram

Footnote 97:

  de _added by Wesenberg_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 117


                                   V

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 2_, B.C. _45_]

I had thought Sp. Mummius was one of the ten legates: but of course, as
was natural, he was private legate to his brother. For he was at
Corinth.[98] I have sent _Torquatus_[99] to you. Speak with Silius as
you say and urge him on. He said my receiving day would not fall in May,
but he did not say the same about the other.[100] But please attend to
the point carefully, as you always do. As to Crispus and Mustela, yes,
when you have settled anything. As you promise to be with me when Brutus
comes, I am satisfied, especially as you are spending these days on
important business of mine.

Footnote 98:

  At its capture in 146 B.C.

Footnote 99:

  _i.e._ the first book of the _De Finibus_. Cf. XIII. 32.

Footnote 100:

  _i.e._ that Cicero could not get in Faberius' debt before the end of
  May; but that the owners of the property he thought of buying would
  want payment before that date. Cf. XIII. 3.


                                   VI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, March_, B.C. _45_]

You have done quite right about the aqueduct. Make sure whether I owe
any pillar-tax at all. However, I think I heard from Camillus that the
law had been changed. What better answer can we give Piso than that
Cato's guardians are away? It was not only from the heirs of Herennius
that he borrowed, but, as you know (for you were acting with me), from
young Lucullus: and that money was taken in Achaia by his guardian. That
is another point that has to be considered. But Piso is behaving
generously, as he says he will not do anything

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 118

voluntatem. Coram igitur, ut scribis, constituemus, quem ad modum rem
explicemus. Quod reliquos coheredes convenisti, plane bene.

Quod epistulam meam ad Brutum poscis, non habeo eius exemplum; sed tamen
salvum est, et ait Tiro te habere oportere, et, ut recordor, una cum
illius obiurgatoria tibi meam quoque, quam ad eum rescripseram, misi.
Iudiciali molestia ut caream, videbis.


                                  VIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano prid. Non. Iun. a. 709_]

Tuditanum istum, proavum Hortensi, plane non noram, et filium, qui tum
non potuerat esse legatus, fuisse putaram. Mummium fuisse ad Corinthum
pro certo habeo. Saepe enim hic Spurius, qui nuper decessit,[101]
epistulas mihi pronuntiabat versiculis facetis ad familiaris missas a
Corintho. Sed non dubito, quin fratri fuerit legatus, non in decem.
Atque hoc etiam accepi, non solitos maiores nostros eos legare in decem,
qui essent imperatorum necessarii, ut nos ignari pulcherrimorum
institutorum aut neglegentes potius M. Lucullum et L. Murenam et ceteros
ad L. Lucullum misimus. Illudque εὐλογώτατον, illum fratri in primis
eius legatis fuisse. O operam tuam multam, qui et haec cures et mea
expedias et sis in tuis non multo minus diligens quam in meis!

Footnote 101:

  decessit _Müller_: est _MSS._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 119

against our will. So, as you say, we will arrange, when we meet, how the
matter is to be straightened out. It is quite as well that you have seen
the other joint heirs.

You ask for my letter to Brutus. I have not a copy: but there is one in
existence and Tiro says you ought to have it: and, so far as I
recollect, I sent you my answer along with his letter of reproof. Please
see that I am not troubled with serving on a jury.


                                  VIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 4_, B.C. _45_]

The Tuditanus you mention, great-grandfather of Hortensius, I had never
heard of, and I thought it was the son who was the ambassador, though he
could not have been at the time. I take it as certain that Mummius was
at Corinth. For Spurius, who died lately, often used to recite to me
letters Mummius wrote to his friends from Corinth in clever verse. But I
have no doubt he was a special legate to his brother, not among the ten
ambassadors. Here is another point too that I have been taught, that it
was not the custom of our ancestors to appoint among the ten ambassadors
anyone who was related to the generals, as we in ignorance of, or rather
in contempt for, the soundest institutions did in sending M. Lucullus
and L. Murena and others to L. Lucullus. But it was most natural that he
should be among the first of his brother's legates. What a lot of work
you get through, attending to points like this, managing my affairs and
bestowing nearly as much care on your own affairs as on mine!

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 120


                                  VII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano V Id. Iun. a. 709_]

Sestius apud me fuit et Theopompus pridie. Venisse a Caesare narrabat
litteras; hoc scribere, sibi certum esse Romae manere, causamque eam
ascribere, quae erat in epistula nostra, ne se absente leges suae
neglegerentur, sicut esset neglecta sumptuaria (est εὔλογον, idque eram
suspicatus. Sed istis mos gerendus est, nisi placet hanc ipsam
sententiam nos persequi), et Lentulum cum Metella certe fecisse
divortium. Haec omnia tu melius. Rescribes igitur, quicquid voles, dum
modo aliquid. Iam enim non reperio, quid te rescripturum putem, nisi
forte de Mustela, aut si Silium videris.


                                  VIIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV Id. Iun. a. 709_]

Brutus heri venit in Tusculanum post horam decimam. Hodie igitur me
videbit, ac vellem tum tu adesses. Iussi equidem ei nuntiari te, quoad
potuisses, exspectasse eius adventum venturumque, si audisses, meque, ut
facio, continuo te certiorem esse facturum.


                                  VIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VI Id. Iun. a. 709_]

Plane nihil erat, quod ad te scriberem; modo enim discesseras et paulo
post triplicis remiseras. Velim cures fasciculum ad Vestorium deferendum
et alicui

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 121


                                  VII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 9_, B.C. _45_]

Sestius came to see me yesterday and Theopompus too. He told me that
Caesar had sent a letter saying he had resolved to stay at Rome and
assigning as a reason the one mentioned in my letter, fear that if he
went away his laws would be disregarded, as his sumptuary law was. That
is reasonable enough and is just what I suspected. But I must humour
your friends, unless you think I could use that very line of argument.
He tells me too that Lentulus has certainly divorced Metella. But you
will know all this better than he does. So please send an
answer,—anything you like provided it is something. For at the moment I
cannot think of anything you will put in your answer, unless it is
something about Mustela, or unless you see Silius.


                                  VIIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 10_, B.C. _45_]

Brutus came to Tusculum yesterday after four o'clock. So to-day he will
see me, and I wish you were with me. I sent him word that you had waited
for him as long as you could, and that you would come, if you heard; and
I would let you know, as soon as I could, which I am doing.


                                  VIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 8_, B.C. _45_]

I have nothing to write; for you have only just left, and soon after you
went, you sent me back my notebook. Please see that the packet is
delivered to Vestorius, and commission someone to find out if

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 122

des negotium, qui quaerat, Q. Staberi fundus num quis in Pompeiano
Nolanove venalis sit. Epitomen Bruti Caelianorum velim mihi mittas et a
Philoxeno Παναιτίου περὶ προνοίας. Te Idibus videbo cum tuis.


                                   IX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XIV K. Quint. a. 709_]

Commodum discesseras heri, cum Trebatius venit, paulo post Curtius, hic
salutandi causa, sed mansit invitatus. Trebatium nobiscum habemus. Hodie
mane Dolabella. Multus sermo ad multum diem. Nihil possum dicere
ἐκτενέστερον, nihil φιλοστοργότερον. Ventum est tamen ad Quintum. Multa
ἄφατα, ἀδιήγητα, sed unum eius modi, quod nisi exercitus sciret, non
modo Tironi dictare, sed ne ipse quidem auderem scribere. Sed hactenus.

Εὐκαίρως ad me venit, cum haberem Dolabellam, Torquatus, humanissimeque
Dolabella, quibus verbis secum egissem, exposuit. Commodum enim egeram
diligentissime; quae diligentia grata est visa Torquato. A te exspecto,
si quid de Bruto. Quamquam Nicias confectum putabat, sed divortium non
probari. Quo etiam magis laboro idem quod tu. Si quid est enim
offensionis, haec res mederi potest.

Mihi Arpinum eundum est. Nam et opus est constitui a nobis illa
praediola, et vereor, ne exeundi

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 123

any part of Q. Staberius' land at Pompeii or Nola is for sale. Please
send me Brutus' _Epitome of the Annals of Caelius_, and get from
Philoxenus Panaetius _On Foresight_. I shall see you and your family on
the 13th.


                                   IX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 18_, B.C. _45_]

You had only just left yesterday, when Trebatius came, and then Curtius
shortly afterwards. The latter only came to pay a call, but he stayed at
my invitation. Trebatius is with me too, and this morning came
Dolabella. We had a long talk till late in the day. I cannot exaggerate
his cordiality and friendliness. However, we touched on young Quintus.
Much of what he told me was unmentionable, unspeakable; but there was
one thing so bad that, if the whole army did not know of it, I should
not dare to dictate it to Tiro or even to write it down myself. But
enough of this.

Torquatus came to me opportunely, while Dolabella was with me, and
Dolabella very kindly repeated to him what I had just been saying. For I
had just been pleading his cause very earnestly; and my earnestness
seemed to please Torquatus greatly. I am waiting to know if you have any
news about Brutus. However, Nicias thought that the matter was settled,
but that the divorce was not approved. For that reason I am all the more
eager about the thing, as you are too. For, if any offence has been
given, this can remedy it.

I must go to Arpinum. For my little place there needs putting in order
and I am afraid I may not

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 124

potestas non sit, cum Caesar venerit; de cuius adventu eam opinionem
Dolabella habet, quam tu coniecturam faciebas ex litteris Messallae. Cum
illuc venero intellexeroque, quid negotii sit, tum, ad quos dies
rediturus sim, scribam ad te.


                                   X

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano inter a. d. XIII et XI K. Quint. a. 709_]

Minime miror te et graviter ferre de Marcello et plura vereri periculi
genera. Quis enim hoc timeret, quod neque acciderat antea nec videbatur
natura ferre ut accidere posset? Omnia igitur metuenda. Sed illud παρὰ
τὴν ἱστορίαν, tu praesertim, me reliquum consularem. Quid? tibi Servius
quid videtur? Quamquam hoc nullam ad partem valet scilicet, mihi
praesertim, qui non minus bene actum cum illis putem. Quid enim sumus
aut quid esse possumus? domin an foris? Quodnisi mihi hoc venisset in
mentem, scribere ista nescio quae, quo verterem me, non haberem.

Ad Dolabellam, ut scribis, ita puto faciendum, κοινότερα quaedam et
πολιτικώτερα. Faciendum certe aliquid est; valde enim desiderat. Brutus
si quid egerit, curabis, ut sciam; cui quidem quam primum agendum puto,
praesertim si statuit. Sermunculum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 125

have much chance of leaving Rome, when Caesar comes. About his coming
Dolabella holds the same idea which you had inferred from Messalla's
letter. When I get there and know how much there is to be done, then I
will write and let you know, when I shall return.


                                   X

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 19-21_, B.C. _45_]

I am not at all surprised at your being upset about Marcellus[102] and
fearing all sorts of new dangers. For who would have feared this? Such a
thing never happened before and it did not seem as though nature could
allow such things to happen. So one may fear anything. But fancy you of
all people making such a historical slip as to call me the only
surviving ex-consul. Why, what about Servius? However, that of course
has not the slightest importance in any respect, least of all to me, who
think my dead comrades' fate quite as happy as my own. For what am I or
what can I be? Am I anything in private life or in public? If it had not
occurred to me to write my books, such as they are, I should not know
what to do with myself.

Footnote 102:

  M. Marcellus had been murdered by P. Magius Chilo.

I think I must follow your advice and dedicate something more general
and more political to Dolabella. I must certainly do something for him,
as he is very anxious for it. If Brutus makes any move, pray let me
know. I think he ought to make one as soon as possible, especially if he
has made up his mind.[103] That would either put an end to all chatter

Footnote 103:

  About his marriage to Porcia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 126

enim omnem aut restinxerit aut sedarit. Sunt enim, qui loquantur etiam
mecum. Sed haec ipse optime, praesertim si etiam tecum loquetur.

Mihi est in animo proficisci XI Kal. Hic enim nihil habeo, quod agam, ne
hercule illic quidem nec usquam, sed tamen aliquid illic. Hodie
Spintherem exspecto. Misit enim Brutus ad me. Per litteras purgat
Caesarem de interitu Marcelli; in quem, ne si insidiis quidem ille
interfectus esset, caderet ulla suspicio. Nunc vero, cum de Magio
constet, nonne furor eius causam omnem sustinet? Plane, quid sit, non
intellego. Explanabis igitur. Quamquam nihil habeo, quod dubitem, nisi,
ipsi Magio quae fuerit causa amentiae; pro quo quidem etiam sponsor sum
factus. Et nimirum id fuit. Solvendo enim non erat. Credo eum petisse a
Marcello aliquid, et illum, ut erat, constantius respondisse.


                                   XI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati IX K. Quint. a. 709_]

"Οὐ ταὐτὸν εἶδος." Credebam esse facile; totum est aliud, posteaquam sum
a te diiunctior. Sed fuit faciendum, ut et constituerem mercedulas
praediorum et ne magnum onus observantiae Bruto nostro imponerem.
Posthac enim poterimus commodius colere inter nos in Tusculano. Hoc
autem tempore, cum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 127

or at any rate lessen it. For there are people who talk even to me. But
he is the best judge himself, especially if he talks it over with you
too.

I am thinking of setting out on the 21st, for I have nothing to do here,
and precious little to do there or anywhere else; still there is
something to do there. To-day I am expecting Spinther, for Brutus has
sent him to me. He writes to exculpate Caesar of Marcellus' death. But
no suspicion would have fallen on Caesar, even if his death had been due
to treachery; and now that Magius is known to be mad, surely that
accounts for everything. I don't see his point at all. Perhaps you will
explain. However, there is nothing I am in doubt about except the reason
for Magius' madness; why, I had even gone security for him. That no
doubt was the point; he was insolvent. I suppose he asked some favour of
Marcellus, and the latter, as was his way, gave a rather decided answer.


                                   XI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, June 23_, B.C. _45_]

"Not the same look."[104] I thought it was easy; but it is quite the
reverse, now I am farther away from you. But it had to be done, that I
might fix some trifles like the rents of my farms and might not lay too
great a burden of attendance on our friend Brutus. For in the future we
shall find ourselves able to cultivate each other's society at Tusculum
more easily. But at the present time, when he wanted

Footnote 104:

  A quotation from Euripides, _Ion_, 585:—

                  οὐ ταὐτόν εἶδος φαίνεται τῶν πραγμάτων
                  πρόσωθεν ὄντων ἔγγυθέν θ' ὁρωμένων.

  "Not the same look wear things, when seen far off and near at hand."

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 128

ille me cotidie videre vellet, ego ad illum ire non possem, privabatur
omni delectatione Tusculani. Tu igitur, si Servilia venerit, si Brutus
quid egerit, etiam si constituerit, quando obviam, quicquid denique
erit, quod scire me oporteat, scribes. Pisonem, si poteris convenies.
Vides, quam maturum sit. Sed tamen, quod commodo tuo fiat.


                                  XII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati VIII K. Quint. a. 709_]

Valde me momorderunt epistulae tuae de Attica nostra; eaedem tamen
sanaverunt. Quod enim te ipse consolabare eisdem litteris, id mihi erat
satis firmum ad leniendam aegritudinem.

Ligarianam praeclare vendidisti. Posthac, quicquid scripsero, tibi
praeconium deferam. Quod ad me de Varrone scribis, scis me antea
orationes aut aliquid id genus solitum scribere, ut Varronem nusquam
possem intexere. Postea autem quam haec coepi φιλολογώτερα, iam Varro
mihi denuntiaverat magnam sane et gravem προσφώνησιν. Biennium
praeteriit, cum ille Καλλιππίδης adsiduo cursu cubitum nullum
processerat, ego autem me parabam ad id, quod ille mihi misisset, ut
"αὐτῷ τῷ μέτρῳ καὶ λώϊον," si modo potuissem. Nam hoc etiam Hesiodus
ascribit, "αἴ κε δύνηαι."

Nunc illam περὶ τελῶν σύνταξιν sane mihi probatam

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 129

to see me every day and I could not go to him, he got no pleasure at all
out of his estate. So, if Servilia has come, if Brutus has begun to do
anything, even if he has made up his mind when I am to meet Caesar, in
short anything there is to tell, please write and tell me. See
Piso,[105] if you can. It is high time, as you can see; however, suit
your convenience.

Footnote 105:

  One of the bankers from whom Cicero hoped to raise money to buy the
  gardens for Tullia's shrine.


                                  XII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, June 24_, B.C. _45_]

Your letter about dear Attica stung me to the quick; but it healed the
wound again. For you consoled yourself in the same letter, and that I
counted sufficient warrant for moderating my grief.

You have given my speech for Ligarius a magnificent start. Henceforth,
when I write anything, I shall leave it to you to advertise it. As to
what you say about Varro, you know formerly I have written speeches or
things of such a kind, that I could not introduce him; but afterwards,
when I began these more literary works, Varro had already promised to
dedicate a great and important work to me. Two years have passed and
that slow coach,[106] though always on the move, has not advanced an
inch, while I was prepared to pay him back "full measure and more" for
what he sent, if I could. For Hesiod adds "if you can."[107]

Footnote 106:

  It is uncertain whether the actor mentioned in Aristotle's _Poetics_,
  ch. 26, is referred to or someone else. Anyhow, the name seems to be
  used proverbially as = "a slow coach."

Footnote 107:

  Hesiod, _Op._ 350.

Now I have pledged my _De Finibus_, of which I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 130

Bruto, ut tibi placuit, despondimus, idque eum non nolle mihi
scripsisti. Ergo illam Ἀκαδημικήν, in qua homines nobiles illi quidem,
sed nullo modo philologi nimis acute loquuntur, ad Varronem
transferamus. Etenim sunt Antiochia, quae iste valde probat. Catulo et
Lucullo alibi reponemus, ita tamen, si tu hoc probas; deque eo mihi
rescribas velim.

De Brinniana auctione accepi a Vestorio litteras. Ait sine ulla
controversia rem ad me esse conlatam. Romae videlicet aut in Tusculano
me fore putaverunt a. d. VIII Kal. Quinct. Dices igitur vel amico tuo,
S. Vettio, coheredi meo, vel Labeoni nostro, paulum proferant auctionem;
me circiter Nonas in Tusculano fore. Cum Pisone Erotem habes. De
Scapulanis hortis toto pectore cogitemus. Dies adest.


                               XIII, XIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati VI K. Quint. a. 709_]

Commotus tuis litteris, quod ad me de Varrone scripseras, totam
Academiam ab hominibus nobilissimis abstuli, transtuli ad nostrum
sodalem et ex duobus libris contuli in quattuor. Grandiores sunt omnino,
quam erant illi, sed tamen multa detracta. Tu autem mihi pervelim
scribas, qui intellexeris illum velle; illud vero utique scire cupio,
quem intellexeris

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 131

think very highly, to Brutus as you advised, and you have told me he was
gratified. So I must assign the _Academica_ to Varro. The speakers in it
are men of birth to be sure, but not scholars, and talk above their own
heads. And indeed the doctrines are those of Antiochus,[108] of which
Varro is a strong supporter. I will make it up to Catulus and Lucullus
somewhere else[109]; that is to say, if you agree. Please write and tell
me.

Footnote 108:

  Antiochus of Ascalon, under whom both Cicero and Varro had studied at
  Athens. His teaching combined the views of the Academy and Stoicism.

Footnote 109:

  They were the chief speakers in the first draft of the _Academica_.

I have had a letter from Vestorius about the auction of Brinnius'
estate. He tells me I was unanimously given the direction of it. They
evidently thought I should be in town or at Tusculum on the 24th. So
please tell your friend S. Vettius, my co-heir, or Labienus, to put the
sale off for a while; and that I shall be at Tusculum about July 7th.
You have Eros to help with Piso. Let us throw ourselves heart and soul
into the purchase of Scapula's gardens. The time is drawing near.


                               XIII, XIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, June 26_, B.C. _45_]

Under the influence of your letters about Varro I have taken the whole
of my _Academica_ from its eminent interlocutors and transferred it to
our friend: and from two books I have turned it into four. They are
certainly finer than the first draft though a good deal has been cut
out. But I should very much like you to tell me how you knew Varro
wanted it: and one thing at any rate I want to know, who

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 132

ab eo ζηλοτυπεῖσθαι nisi forte Brutum. Id hercle restabat. Sed tamen
scire pervelim. Libri quidem ita exierunt, nisi forte me communis
φιλαυτία decipit, ut in tali genere ne apud Graecos quidem simile
quicquam. Tu illam iacturam feres aequo animo, quod illa, quae habes de
Academicis, frustra descripta sunt. Multo tamen haec erunt splendidiora,
breviora, meliora. Nunc autem ἀπορῶ, quo me vertam. Volo Dolabellae
valde desideranti; non reperio, quid, et simul [Sidenote: _Iliad_, vi.
442; xxii. 100] "αἰδέομαι Τρῶας" neque, si aliquid, potero μέμψιν
effugere. Aut cessandum igitur aut aliquid excogitandum. Sed quid haec
levia curamus?

Attica mea, obsecro te, quid agit? Quae me valde angit. Sed crebro
regusto tuas litteras; in his acquiesco. Tamen exspecto novas.

Brinni libertus, coheres noster, scripsit ad me velle, si mihi placeret,
coheredes, se et Sabinum Albium, ad me venire. Id ego plane nolo.
Hereditas tanti non est. Et tamen obire auctionis diem facile poterunt
(est enim III Idus), si me in Tusculano postridie Nonas mane
convenerint. Quodsi laxius volent proferre diem, poterunt vel biduum vel
triduum, vel ut videbitur; nihil enim interest. Quare, nisi iam profecti
sunt, retinebis homines. De Bruto, si quid egerit, de Caesare, si quid
scies, si quid erit praeterea, scribes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 133

was it of whom you noticed he was jealous: unless perhaps it was Brutus.
Upon my word that is the only possible answer:[110] but still I should
much like to know. Unless I am deceived like most people by egotism, the
books have turned out superior to anything of the kind even in Greek.
You must not be annoyed at the loss you have incurred in having the part
of the _Academica_ you have copied in vain. The new draft will be far
finer, shorter, and better. But now I don't know where to turn. I want
to do something for Dolabella, as he is very anxious for it. But I can't
think of anything, and at the same time "I fear the Trojans,"[111] and
even if I can think of something, I shall not escape criticism. So I
must either be idle or rack my brains for something. But why do I bother
about trifles like this?

Footnote 110:

  Or "that is the last straw," or "the height of absurdity."

Footnote 111:

  _i.e._, public opinion. Cf. _Att._ II. 5.

Pray tell me how dear Attica is. I am very anxious about her. But I keep
dipping into your letter again and again, and that solaces me.
Nevertheless I am looking forward to a fresh one.

Brinnius' freedman, my co-heir, has written to me that the rest of the
heirs want him and Sabinus Albius to come to me, if I am willing. I am
all against that: it is more than the legacy is worth. However, they can
easily manage to attend the auction, which is on the 13th, if they meet
me at my place at Tusculum early on the 8th. But, if they want to put
off the date still further, they can do so two or three days or as much
as they like: it does not matter to me. So, unless the people have
started already, stop them. If Brutus has done anything, or if you have
any news about Caesar or anything else, let me know.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 134


                                XIV, XV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati V K. Quint, a. 709_]

Illud etiam atque etiam consideres velim, placeatne tibi mitti ad
Varronem, quod scripsimus. Etsi etiam ad te aliquid pertinet. Nam scito
te ei dialogo adiunctum esse tertium. Opinor igitur, consideremus. Etsi
nomina iam facta sunt; sed vel induci vel mutari possunt.

Quid agit, obsecro te, Attica nostra? Nam triduo abs te nullas
acceperam; nec mirum. Nemo enim venerat, nec fortasse causa fuerat.
Itaque ipse, quod scriberem, non habebam. Quo autem die has Valerio
dabam, exspectabam aliquem meorum. Qui si venisset et a te quid
attulisset, videbam non defuturum, quod scriberem.


                                  XVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati IV K. Quint, a. 709_]

Nos, cum flumina et solitudinem sequeremur, quo facilius sustentare nos
possemus, pedem e villa adhuc egressi non sumus; ita magnos et adsiduos
imbres habebamus. Illam Ἀκαδημικὴν σύνταξιν totam ad Varronem
traduximus. Primo fuit Catuli, Luculli, Hortensi; deinde, quia παρὰ τὸ
πρέπον videbatur, quod erat hominibus nota non illa quidem ἀπαιδευσία,
sed in iis rebus ἀτριψία, simul ac veni ad villam, eosdem illos sermones
ad Catonem Brutumque transtuli. Ecce tuae litterae de Varrone. Nemini
visa

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 135


                                XIV, XV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, June 27_, B.C. _45_]

Please give your earnest consideration to deciding whether what I have
written ought to be sent to Varro: though the point has some personal
interest for you too: for you must know I have brought you in as a third
speaker in the dialogue. So I think we must consider. The names,
however, have been entered, but they can be scratched out or altered.

Pray tell me how Attica is. It is three days since I heard from you, and
no wonder: for no one has come here, and perhaps there was no reason for
writing. So I myself have nothing to write. However, I am expecting one
of my messengers the very day I am giving this to Valerius. If he comes
and brings something from you, I foresee I shall have no lack of
material.


                                  XVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, June 28_, B.C. _45_]

Though I was looking for streams and solitude, to make life more
endurable, at present I have not stirred a foot away from the house; we
have had such heavy and continuous rain. The "Academic Treatise" I have
transferred entirely to Varro. At first it was assigned to Catulus,
Lucullus, and Hortensius; then, as that seemed inappropriate because
they were well-known not to be up in such matters, though not
illiterate, as soon as I came here I transferred the conversations to
Cato and Brutus. Then came your letter about Varro and he seemed the
most appropriate person possible to air Antiochus'

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 136

est aptior Antiochia ratio. Sed tamen velim scribas ad me, primum
placeatne tibi aliquid ad illum, deinde, si placebit, hocne potissimum.

Quid? Servilia iamne venit? Brutus ecquid agit et quando? De Caesare
quid auditur? Ego ad Nonas, quem ad modum dixi. Tu cum Pisone, si quid
poteris.


                              XVII, XVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati III K. Quint. a. 709_]

V Kal. exspectabam Roma aliquid novi. Imperassem igitur aliquid tuis.
Nunc eadem illa, quid Brutus cogitet, aut, si aliquid egit, ecquid a
Caesare. Sed quid ista, quae minus curo? Attica nostra quid agat, scire
cupio. Etsi tuae litterae (sed iam nimis veteres sunt) recte sperare
iubent, tamen exspecto recens aliquid.

Vides, propinquitas quid habeat. Nos vero conficiamus hortos. Conloqui
videbamur, in Tusculano cum essem; tanta erat crebritas litterarum. Sed
id quidem iam erit. Ego interea admonitu tuo perfeci sane argutulos
libros ad Varronem, sed tamen exspecto, quid ad ea, quae scripsi ad te,
primum qui intellexeris eum desiderare a me, cum ipse homo
πολυγραφώτατος numquam me lacessisset; deinde quem ζηλοτυπεῖν nisi forte
Brutum, quem si non ζηλοτυπεῖ,[112] multo Hortensium minus aut eos, qui
de re

Footnote 112:

  nisi ... ζηλοτυπεῖ _added by Bosius_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 137

views. However, I should like you to write whether you approve of
dedicating anything to him, and, if you do, whether you approve of this
particular book.

What about Servilia? Has she come? Has Brutus done anything, and when?
What news of Caesar? I shall arrive on the 7th of July, as I said. Make
some arrangement with Piso, if you can.


                              XVII, XVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, June 29_, B.C. _45_]

I was expecting some news from Rome on the 27th. Then I should have
given some orders to your men. Now I have only the same old questions.
What is Brutus thinking of doing, or, if he has done anything, has any
comment come from Caesar? But why do I ask about these things, when I
care very little about them? I do want to know how our dear Attica is
getting on. Though your letter (but that is quite out of date now) bids
me be hopeful, still I am anxious for fresh news.

You see the advantage of being near at hand. Certainly let us settle
about the gardens. We seemed to be talking to one another, when I was at
Tusculum, so frequent was the interchange of letters. But that will be
the same again soon. Meantime I have taken your hint and finished off
some really quite clever books for Varro. But I am waiting for your
answer to my questions: first, how you knew he wanted anything from me,
when in spite of his voluminous writings he has never challenged me; and
next, who it was of whom he was jealous, unless it may have been Brutus.
If he is not jealous of him, he certainly cannot be of Hortensius or the
speakers in the _De Republica._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 138

publica loquuntur. Plane hoc mihi explices velim, in primis maneasne in
sententia, ut mittam ad eum, quae scripsi, an nihil necesse putes. Sed
haec coram.


                                  XIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati prid. K. Quint. a. 709_]

Commodum discesserat Hilarus librarius IV Kal., cui dederam litteras ad
te, cum venit tabellarius cum tuis litteris pridie datis; in quibus
illud mihi gratissimum fuit, quod Attica nostra rogat te, ne tristis
sis, quodque tu ἀκίνδυνα esse scribis.

Ligarianam, ut video, praeclare auctoritas tua commendavit. Scripsit
enim ad me Balbus et[113] Oppius mirifice se probare, ob eamque causam
ad Caesarem eam se oratiunculam misisse. Hoc igitur idem tu mihi antea
scripseras.

Footnote 113:

  et _added by Vict._

In Varrone ista causa me non moveret, ne viderer φιλένδοξος (sic enim
constitueram, neminem includere in dialogos eorum, qui viverent); sed,
quia scribis et desiderari a Varrone et magni illum aestimare, eos
confeci et absolvi, nescio quam bene, sed ita accurate, ut nihil posset
supra, Academicam omnem quaestionem libris quattuor. In eis, quae erant
contra ἀκαταληψίαν praeclare collecta ab Antiocho, Varroni dedi. Ad ea
ipse respondeo; tu es tertius in sermone nostro. Si Cottam et Varronem
fecissem inter se disputantes, ut a te proximis litteris admoneor,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 139

I should like you to make this quite clear to me, especially whether you
abide by your opinion that I should send him what I have written, or
whether you think it is unnecessary. But of this when we meet.


                                  XIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, June 30_, B.C. _45_]

The copyist Hilarus had just left on the 28th, and I had given him a
letter to you, when your messenger came with your letter of the day
before. What I was most glad to see in it was the sentence "Our dear
Attica begs you not to be anxious" and your own statement that there is
no danger.

I see your influence has given my speech for Ligarius a good start. For
Balbus has written to me with Oppius, saying that he is extraordinarily
pleased with it; and for that reason he has sent the little thing to
Caesar. So that is what you wrote to me some time ago.

In Varro's case I should not be disturbed about appearing to be
tuft-hunting—for my principle has always been not to insert any living
characters in my dialogues; but it was because you say Varro wants it,
and appreciates the compliment, that I have finished off the work and
have comprised the whole of the Academic philosophy—how well I cannot
say, but with all possible care—in four books. All the fine array of
arguments against the uncertainty of apperceptions collected by
Antiochus I have given to Varro; I answer him myself, and you are the
third speaker in our conversation. If I had made Cotta and Varro carry
on the argument between them, as you suggest in your last letter, I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 140

meum κωφὸν πρόσωπον esset. Hoc in antiquis personis suaviter fit, ut et
Heraclides in multis et nos in VI "de re publica" libris fecimus. Sunt
etiam "de oratore" nostri tres mihi vehementer probati. In eis quoque
eae personae sunt, ut mihi tacendum fuerit. Crassus enim loquitur,
Antonius, Catulus senex, C. Iulius, frater Catuli, Cotta, Sulpicius.
Puero me hic sermo inducitur, ut nullae esse possent partes meae. Quae
autem his temporibus scripsi, Ἀριστοτέλειον morem habent, in quo sermo
ita inducitur ceterorum, ut penes ipsum sit principatus. Ita confeci
quinque libros περὶ τελῶν, ut Epicurea L. Torquato, Stoica M. Catoni,
περιπατητικὰ M. Pisoni darem. Ἀζηλοτύπητον id fore putaram, quod omnes
illi decesserant. Haec "Academica," ut scis, cum Catulo, Lucullo,
Hortensio contuleram. Sane in personas non cadebant; erant enim
λογικώτερα quam ut illi de iis somniasse umquam viderentur. Itaque, ut
legi tuas de Varrone, tamquam ἕρμαιον arripui. Aptius esse nihil potuit
ad id philosophiae genus, quo ille maxime mihi delectari videtur, easque
partes, ut non sim consecutus, ut superior mea causa videatur. Sunt enim
vehementer πιθανὰ Antiochia; quae diligenter a me expressa acumen habent
Antiochi, nitorem orationis nostrum, si modo is est aliquis in nobis.
Sed tu, dandosne putes hos libros Varroni, etiam atque etiam videbis.
Mihi quaedam occurrunt; sed ea coram.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 141

should have been a mere lay figure. That suits admirably when the
characters are persons of olden times; and that is what Heraclides often
did in his works; and I myself did so in my six books _De Republica_. It
is the same, too, in my three books _De Oratore_, of which I think very
highly; in them, too, the characters were such that I could properly
keep silent. For the speakers are Crassus, Antonius, old Catulus, his
brother C. Julius, Cotta and Sulpicius; and the conversation is supposed
to take place when I was a boy, so that I could have no part in it. But
in a modern work, I follow Aristotle's practice: the conversation of the
others is so put forward as to leave him the principal part. I arranged
the five books _De Finibus_ so as to give the Epicurean parts to L.
Torquatus, the Stoic to M. Cato, and the Peripatetic to M. Piso. I
thought that could not make anybody jealous, as they were all dead. This
present work, the _Academica_, as you know, I had shared between
Catulus, Lucullus and Hortensius. I must admit that the work did not
suit the characters; for it was far too philosophical for them to have
ever dreamt of such things. So, when I read your note about Varro, I
jumped at it as a godsend. Nothing could have been more appropriate for
expounding the system of philosophy in which he seems to be specially
interested, and for introducing a part which prevents me from seeming to
give my own cause the superiority. For the views of Antiochus are very
persuasive, and I have put them carefully with all Antiochus' acuteness
and my own polished style, if I possess one. But do you consider
carefully, whether you think I ought to dedicate the books to Varro.
Some objections occur to me; but of that when we meet.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 142


                                   XX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati VI aut V Non. Quint. a. 709_]

A Caesare litteras accepi consolatorias datas pridie Kal. Maias Hispali.
De urbe augenda quid sit promulgatum, non intellexi. Id scire sane
velim. Torquato nostra officia grata esse facile patior eaque augere non
desinam. Ad Ligarianam de uxore Tuberonis et privigna neque possum iam
addere (est enim pervulgata) neque Tuberonem volo offendere; mirifice
est enim φιλαίτιος. Theatrum quidem sane bellum habuisti. Ego, etsi hoc
loco facillime sustentor, tamen te videre cupio. Itaque, ut constitui,
adero. Fratrem credo a te esse conventum. Scire igitur studeo, quid
egeris.

De fama nihil sane laboro; etsi scripseram ad te tunc stulte "nihil
melius"; curandum enim non est. Atque hoc "in omni vita sua quemque a
recta conscientia traversum unguem non oportet discedere" viden quam
φιλοσόφως? An tu nos frustra existimas haec in manibus habere? Δεδῆχθαι
te nollem, quod nihil erat. Redeo enim rursus eodem. Quicquamne me putas
curare in toto,[114] nisi ut ei ne desim? Id ago scilicet, ut iudicia
videar tenere. "Μὴ γὰρ αὐτοῖς—." Vellem tam domestica ferre possem quam
ista contemnere.

Footnote 114:

  _For_ in toto _many suggestions have been made_ (_e.g._ in Torquato
  _Müller_: in Bruto _Schmidt_), _and for_ ei _Wieland suggested_ mihi.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 143


                                   XX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, July 2 or 3_, B.C. _45_]

I have received a letter of consolation from Caesar, posted on the last
of April at Hispalis. I did not understand what the proposals for
improving the city are; and I should much like to know. I am not
displeased that Torquatus is satisfied with my attentions, and I shall
not cease to increase them. To the speech for Ligarius I cannot add
anything now about Tubero's[115] wife and step-daughter, since the
speech is widely circulated, and I do not wish to offend Tubero; for he
is most touchy. You certainly had a good audience. Though I am happy
enough here, I am longing to see you; so I shall come as arranged. I
think you have met my brother; so I am anxious to know what happened.

Footnote 115:

  Tubero was the prosecutor of Ligarius.

About my reputation I don't care a straw; though I did once write to you
foolishly that there was nothing better; for it is not worth bothering
about. And see what deep philosophy there is in this other sentiment of
mine, "In all one's life one ought not to stray a nail's breadth from
the straight path of conscience." Do you think I am engaged in
philosophical treatises for nothing? I should be sorry for you to
distress yourself about a mere nothing. Now I come back to my point. Do
you suppose I care for anything in the whole matter, except that I
should not be untrue to it.[116] I am striving, it seems then, to
maintain my position in the law courts. God forbid! Would I could bear
my private sorrow as easily as I despise them. But do

Footnote 116:

  The sense and the reading of this sentence are very doubtful.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 144

Putas autem me voluisse aliquid, quod perfectum non sit? Non licet
scilicet sententiam suam, sed tamen, quae tum acta sunt, non possum non
probare, et tamen non curare pulchre possum, sicuti facio. Sed nimium
multa de nugis.


                                  XXI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae IV K. Sext. a. 709_]

Ad Hirtium dederam epistulam sane grandem, quam scripseram proxime in
Tusculano. Huic, quam tu mihi misisti, rescribam alias. Nunc alia malo.
Quid possum de Torquato, nisi aliquid a Dolabella? Quod simul ac,
continuo scietis. Exspectabam hodie aut summum eras ab eo tabellarios;
qui simul ac venerint, mittentur ad te. A Quinto exspecto. Proficiscens
enim e Tusculano VIII Kal., ut scis, misi ad eum tabellarios.

Nunc, ad rem ut redeam, "inhibere" illud tuum, quod valde mihi
adriserat, vehementer displicet. Est enim verbum totum nauticum.
Quamquam id quidem sciebam, sed arbitrabar sustineri remos, cum inhibere
essent remiges iussi. Id non esse eius modi didici heri, cum ad villam
nostram navis appelleretur. Non enim sustinent, sed alio modo remigant.
Id ab ἐποχῇ remotissumum est. Quare facies, ut ita sit in libro, quem ad
modum fuit. Dices hoc idem Varroni, si

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 145

you suppose there was some aspiration which was left unfulfilled? Of
course one should not praise one's own principles, but I cannot help
praising my past life, and yet I can well enough feel indifferent about
it, as indeed I do. But that is enough and more than enough about such a
trifle.


                                  XXI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, July 29_, B.C. _45_]

I have sent a very bulky letter to Hirtius, which I wrote lately at
Tusculum. This letter which you have sent, I will answer later. Just now
I prefer other things. What can I do for Torquatus, unless I hear from
Dolabella? As soon as I hear, you shall know at once. I am expecting
messengers from him to-day or to-morrow at the latest; and, as soon as
they come, they shall be sent on to you. I am expecting to hear from
Quintus. For when I was starting from Tusculum on the 25th, as you know,
I sent messengers to him.

To return to business, the word _inhibere_ suggested by you, which at
first took my fancy very much, I strongly disapprove of now. For it is
exclusively a nautical word. That, however, I knew before; but I thought
rowers rested on their oars, when told to _inhibere_. Yesterday, when a
ship put in by my house, I learned that was not so. They don't rest on
their oars, they back water. That is very different to the Greek ἐποχή.
So change the word back to what it was in the book[117]; and tell Varro
to do

Footnote 117:

  _Academica_ II. 94. Ἐποχή, of which the Latin rendering is here
  discussed, is the technical term in philosophy for "suspension of
  judgment."

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 146

forte mutavit. Nec est melius quicquam quam ut Lucilius:

          "Sustineas currum ut bonus saepe agitator equosque."

Semperque Carneades προβολὴν pugilis et retentionem aurigae similem
facit ἐποχῇ. Inhibitio autem remigum motum habet, et vehementiorem
quidem, remigationis navem convertentis ad puppim. Vides, quanto hoc
diligentius curem quam aut de rumore aut de Pollione. De Pansa etiam, si
quid certius (credo enim palam factum esse), de Critonio, si quid est,
sed certe[118] de Metello et Balbino.

Footnote 118:

  est, sed certe _Wesenberg_: esset certe ne _MSS._


                                  XXIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati prid K. aut K. Quint. a. 709_]

Dic mihi, placetne tibi primum edere iniussu meo? Hoc ne Hermodorus
quidem faciebat, is qui Platonis libros solitus est divulgare, ex quo
"λόγοισιν Ἑρμόδωρος." Quid? illud rectumne existimas cuiquam ante
quam[119]. Bruto, cui te auctore προσφωνῶ? Scripsit enim Balbus ad me se
a te quintum "de finibus" librum descripsisse; in quo non sane multa
mutavi, sed tamen quaedam. Tu autem commode feceris, si reliquos
continueris, ne et ἀδιόρθωτα habeat Balbus et ἕωλα Brutus. Sed haec
hactenus, ne videar περὶ μικρὰ σπουδάζειν. Etsi nunc quidem maxima mihi
sunt haec; quid est enim aliud?

Footnote 119:

  ante quam _added by Vict._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 147

the same, if he has altered it. One can't improve on Lucilius: "Pull up
chariot and horses as a good driver oft does." And Carneades always
compares the philosopher's suspension of judgment (ἐποχή) to the guard
of a boxer and the pulling up of a charioteer. But the _inhibitio_ of
rowers implies motion, and indeed the rather violent motion of rowing to
back the boat. You see how much more attention I pay to this than either
to rumour or to Pollio. Let me know too about Pansa, if anything
definite is known, and I suppose it has come out, about Critonius, if
there is any news, and anyhow about Metellus and Balbinus.


                                  XXIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum June 30 or July 1_, B.C. _45_]

Come now, do you really think you ought to publish without my orders?
Even Hermodorus never did such a thing, though he used to circulate
Plato's books, and that gave rise to the line "our Hermodorus deals in
dialogues."[120] Do you really think you were justified in sending to
anyone before you sent to Brutus, to whom at your advice I dedicated the
work. For Balbus has written to me that you let him have a copy of the
fifth book of the _De Finibus_, in which I have made a few alterations,
though not many. However, I shall be obliged if you will keep back the
others, so that Balbus may not get unrevised copies and Brutus what is
stale. But enough of this; I don't want to seem to make a fuss about
trifles. Though these are now my important things, for what else have I?

Footnote 120:

  The verse ends with ἐμπορεύεται.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 148

Varroni quidem quae scripsi te auctore, ita propero mittere, ut iam
Romam miserim describenda. Ea si voles, statim habebis. Scripsi enim ad
librarios, ut fieret tuis, si tu velles, describendi potestas. Ea vero
continebis, quoad ipse te videam; quod diligentissime facere soles, cum
a me tibi dictum est. Quo modo antea fugit me tibi dicere? Mirifice
Caerellia, studio videlicet philosophiae flagrans, describit a tuis;
istos ipsos "de finibus" habet. Ego autem tibi confirmo (possum falli ut
homo) a meis eam non habere; numquam enim ab oculis meis afuerunt.
Tantum porro aberat, ut binos scriberent; vix singulos confecerunt.
Tuorum tamen ego nullum delictum arbitror itemque te volo existimare; a
me enim praetermissum est, ut dicerem me eos exire nondum velle. Hui,
quam diu de nugis! de re enim nihil habeo quod loquar.

De Dolabella tibi adsentior. Coheredes, ut scribis, in Tusculano. De
Caesaris adventu scripsit ad me Balbus non ante Kal. Sextiles. De Attica
optime, quod levius ac levius, et quod fert εὐκόλως. Quod autem de illa
nostra cogitatione scribis, in qua nihil tibi cedo, ea, quae novi, valde
probo, hominem, domum, facultates. Quod caput est, ipsum non novi, sed
audio laudabilia, de Scrofa etiam proxime. Accedit, si quid hoc ad rem,
εὐγενέστερος est etiam quam pater. Coram igitur et quidem propenso animo
ad probandum. Accedit enim, quod patrem, ut scire te puto, plus etiam
quam non modo tu, sed quam ipse scit, amo idque et merito et iam diu.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 149

I am in such a hurry to send what I have written to Varro, as you
suggested, that I have sent it already to Rome to be copied. If you
like, you shall have it at once. For I wrote to my copyist telling them
to give your people leave to copy, if you liked. Please keep it,
however, till I see you. You are generally most careful to do so, when I
have told you. I was nearly forgetting to say that Caerellia, inspired
of course by love of philosophy, is copying from your people[121]; she
has those very books _De Finibus_. I assure you, so far as it is humanly
possible to affirm anything, that she did not get it from mine, for my
copy was never out of my sight. So far were my people from making two
copies, that they could scarcely make up one. However, I am not finding
any fault in your people, and I hope you will not either, for I omitted
to say that I did not want the books circulated yet. Dear me, how I do
harp on trifles. The fact is I have nothing of importance to say.

Footnote 121:

  Or "copies."

I agree about Dolabella. My co-heirs I will meet at Tusculum, as you
suggest. As to Caesar's arrival, Balbus has written that he won't be
here till the first of August. It is good news that Attica's attack gets
slighter and slighter and that she is bearing it cheerfully. As to that
idea of ours, about which I am quite as eager as you are, so far as I
know anything about the man, I approve of him, his family, and his
fortune. What is most important is that, though I do not know him
himself, I hear very well of him, even quite recently from Scrofa. If it
is of any importance, one may add that he is even better bred than his
father. So we will speak of it when we meet, and I am disposed to
approve. For in addition, as I think you know, I am with good reason and
long have been fonder of his father than either you or he himself is
aware.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 150


                                  XXII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati IV Non. Quint. a. 709_]

De Varrone non sine causa quid tibi placeat tam diligenter exquiro.
Occurrunt mihi quaedam. Sed ea coram. Te autem ἀσμεναίτατα intexui,
faciamque id crebrius. Proximis enim tuis litteris primum te id non
nolle cognovi. De Marcello scripserat ad me Cassius antea, τὰ κατὰ μέρος
Servius. O rem acerbam! Ad prima redeo. Scripta nostra nusquam malo esse
quam apud te, sed ea tum foras dari, cum utrique nostrum videbitur. Ego
et librarios tuos culpa libero, neque te accuso, et tamen aliud quiddam
ad te scripseram, Caerelliam quaedam habere, quae nisi a te[122] habere
non potuerit. Balbo quidem intellegebam sat faciendum fuisse, tantum
nolebam aut obsoletum Bruto aut Balbo inchoatum dari. Varroni, simul ac
te videro, si tibi videbitur, mittam. Quid autem dubitarim, cum videro
te, scies.

Footnote 122:

  habere ... te _omitted by MSS.; added by Ascensius and old editors_.

Attributos quod appellas, valde probo. Te de praedio Oviae exerceri
moleste fero. De Bruto nostro perodiosum, sed vita fert. Mulieres autem
vix satis humane, quae iniquo animo ferant, cum utraque

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 151


                                  XXII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, July 4_, B.C. _45_]

I have my reasons for asking so persistently for your opinion about
Varro. Some objections occur to me; but of those when we meet. Your name
I introduced with the greatest pleasure and I shall do so more
frequently, for I see for the first time from your last letter that you
do not disapprove. About Marcellus Cassius had already written to me,
and Servius sent some details.[123] What a sad thing! I return to my
former point. There are no hands in which I would rather have my
writings than in yours, but I should prefer them not to leave your hands
till we have agreed on it. I acquit your copyists of fault and I bring
no charge against you; but there was something different that I did
mention in a letter, that Caerellia had some things she could only have
got from you. In Balbus' case I realize of course that you had to
satisfy him; only I am sorry that Brutus should get anything stale or
Balbus anything unfinished. I will send to Varro, as soon as I have seen
you, if you agree. Why I have hesitated, you shall know, when I do see
you.

Footnote 123:

  M. Marcellus, consul in 51 B.C. and a partisan of Pompey, had just
  been murdered by M. Magius Cibo at Athens out of jealousy for the
  favour shown him by Caesar, who had granted him permission to return
  to Rome, an event celebrated in Cicero's speech _Pro Marcello_.
  Servius' letter is preserved, _Ad Fam._ IV. 12, and gives full details
  of the murder. Cf. also _Att._ XIII. 10.

I strongly approve of your calling in those debts which have been
transferred to me. I am sorry you are being bothered about Ovia's
estate. About Brutus it is a great nuisance, but such is life. The
ladies, however, are not very considerate in being annoyed, though both
of them observe the proprieties.[124]

Footnote 124:

  Cato's daughter Porcia, to whom Brutus was to be married, and his
  mother Servilia, who being a partisan of Caesar opposed the marriage.
  Most editors however adopt Orelli's reading _in utraque_, in which
  case it would mean "though Brutus is attentive to both."

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 152

officio pareat. Tullium scribam nihil fuit quod appellares; nam tibi
mandassem, si fuisset. Nihil enim est apud eum positum nomine voti, sed
est quiddam apud illum meum. Id ego in hanc rem statui conferre. Itaque
et ego recte tibi dixi, ubi esset, et tibi ille recte negavit. Sed hoc
quoque ipsum continuo adoriamur. Lucum hominibus non sane probo, quod
est desertior, sed habet εὐλογίαν. Verum hoc quoque, ut censueris,
quippe qui omnia. Ego, ut constitui, adero, atque utinam tu quoque eodem
die! Sin quid (multa enim), utique postridie. Etenim coheredes: a quibus
sine tua opprimi malitia. Est[125] alteris iam litteris nihil ad me de
Attica. Sed id quidem in optima spe pono; illud accuso non te, sed
illam, ne salutem quidem. At tu et illi et Piliae plurimam, nec me tamen
irasci indicaris. Epistulam Caesaris misi, si minus legisses.

Footnote 125:

  a quis sine te opprimi militia est _MSS.: the reading I have adopted
  is that of Tyrrell_.


                                 XXIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VI Id. Quint. a. 709_]

Antemeridianis tuis litteris heri statim rescripsi; nunc respondeo
vespertinis. Brutus mallem me arcesseret.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 153

There was no necessity for you to dun my secretary Tullius; I should
have told you, if there had been. For he has nothing of mine towards
carrying out my vow.[126] But he has some of my money, and that I am
thinking of devoting to that purpose. So we were both right, I in
telling you where it was, and he in denying he had it. But let us get
hold of this same money also at once. I do not very much approve of a
grove for mortals, as it is not much frequented; but there is something
to say for it. However, let that too be as you like, since you decide
everything. I shall come to town when I arranged, and I hope to goodness
you will be there the same day. But, if anything prevents you, and lots
of things may, the next day at any rate. For there are my co-heirs, and
without your shrewdness I shall be done for. This is the second letter
with no news of Attica. But that I take as a hopeful sign. There is one
thing I have a grievance about, not against you, but against her, that
she does not even send her regards. But pay my best respects to her and
to Pilia, and don't hint that I am angry anyhow. I am sending Caesar's
letter, in case you should not have read it.

Footnote 126:

  _i.e._ no money deposited with him towards the building of the shrine.


                                 XXIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July 10_, B.C. _45_]

The morning's letter I answered yesterday at once, now I am answering
yours of the evening. I would rather Brutus had asked me to Rome. It

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 154

Et aequius erat, cum illi iter instaret et subitum et longum, et me
hercule nunc, cum ita simus adfecti, ut non possimus plane simul vivere
(intellegis enim profecto, in quo maxime posita sit συμβίωσις), facile
patiebar nos potius Romae una esse quam in Tusculano.

Libri ad Varronem non morabantur, sunt enim detexti, ut vidisti; tantum
librariorum menda tolluntur. De quibus libris scis me dubitasse, sed tu
videris. Item, quos Bruto mittimus, in manibus habent librarii.

Mea mandata, ut scribis, explica. Quamquam ista retentione omnes ait uti
Trebatius; quid tu istos putas? Nosti domum. Quare confice εὐαγώγως.
Incredibile est, quam ego ista non curem. Omni tibi adseveratione
adfirmo, quod mihi credas velim, mihi maiori offensioni esse quam
delectationi possessiunculas meas. Magis enim doleo me non habere, cui
tradam, quam gaudeo[127] habere, qui utar. Atque illud Trebatius se tibi
dixisse narrabat; tu autem veritus es fortasse, ne ego invitus audirem.
Fuit id quidem humanitatis, sed, mihi crede, iam ista non curo. Quare da
te in sermonem et perseca et confice, et ita cum Polla loquere, ut te
cum illo Scaeva loqui

Footnote 127:

  gaudeo _added by Gronovius_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 155

would have been fairer, as he is on the point of a sudden long journey,
and upon my soul I should have much preferred that we should meet in
Rome rather than in my house at Tusculum, now that the state of our
feelings prevents us from living together at all, for of course you
understand what constitutes good company.

There is no delay about the books dedicated to Varro. They are finished,
as you have seen; there is only the correction of the copyists'
mistakes. About those books you know I have had some hesitation, but you
must look to it. The copyists have in hand, too, those I am dedicating
to Brutus.

Carry out my instructions as you say. However what about that
abatement?[128] Trebatius says everybody is taking advantage of it. What
do you suppose my debtors will do? You know the gang.[129] So settle the
matter accommodatingly. You would never believe how little I care about
such things. I give you my solemn word for it, and I hope you will
believe me, that the little I have causes me more annoyance than
pleasure. For I am more grieved at having no one to leave it to than
pleased at having enough for my own enjoyment. Trebatius tells me he
told you so; but perhaps you feared I should be sorry at the news. That
was certainly kind of you; but, believe me, I don't care about such
things now. So get you to your conferences, hack away at it and finish
the business; and in talking with Polla consider you are talking with
that fellow Scaeva,[130] and

Footnote 128:

  By the Julian law of 49 B.C. debtors could make over property to their
  creditors on the valuation it had before the Civil war, and could
  deduct all interest already paid from the debt.

Footnote 129:

  _Domum_ may refer to some house offered in payment of a debt to
  Cicero, or it may possibly be used in the sense I, following most
  editors, have given it, for which however _familia_ is commoner. Reid
  would read _dominum_, referring it to Caesar.

Footnote 130:

  Caesar had a favourite centurion named Scaeva, and that may be the
  person here referred to. If so it means "remember they are all people
  who have shared Caesar's plunder." But many regard the name and the
  words _da_ to _confice_ as a quotation from some play.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 156

putes, nec existimes eos, qui non debita consectari soleant, quod
debeatur, remissuros. De die tantum videto et id ipsum bono modo.


                                  XXIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano V Id. Quint. a. 709_]

Quid est, quod Hermogenes mihi Clodius Andromenem sibi dixisse se
Ciceronem vidisse Corcyrae? Ego enim audita tibi putaram. Nil igitur ne
ei quidem litterarum? An non vidit? Facies ergo, ut sciam.

Quid tibi ego de Varrone rescribam? Quattuor διφθέραι sunt in tua
potestate. Quod egeris, id probabo. Nec tamen "αἰδέομαι Τρῶας." Quid
enim? Sed, ipsi quam res illa probaretur, magis verebar. Sed, quoniam tu
suscipis, in alteram aurem.

De retentione rescripsi ad tuas accurate scriptas litteras. Conficies
igitur, et quidem sine ulla dubitatione aut retrectatione. Hoc fieri et
oportet et opus est.


                                  XXV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV Id. Quint. a. 709_]

De Andromene, ut scribis, ita putaram. Scisses enim mihique dixisses. Tu
tamen ita mihi de Bruto scribis, ut de te nihil. Quando autem illum
putas? Nam ego Romam pridie Idus. Bruto ita volui scribere

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 157

don't imagine that those who are in the habit of taking what is not
owing to them, will abate anything that is. Only be careful that they
pay up to time and allow some latitude there too.


                                  XXIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July 11_, B.C. _45_]

What am I to make of this? Hermogenes Clodius tells me that Andromenes
said he saw my son at Corcyra. For I supposed you had heard of it. Then
didn't he give any letter even to him? Or perhaps he didn't see him. You
must let me know, please.

What answer am I to give you about Varro? You have the four parchment
rolls: and whatever you do I shall approve. It is not that "I fear the
Trojans."[131] Why should I? But I am more afraid how he may regard it.
However, as you undertake the matter, I shall sleep in peace.[132]

Footnote 131:

  Cf. _Att._ XIII. 13.

Footnote 132:

  Lit. "on both ears." Supply _dormire licet_.

About the abatement I have answered your careful letter. You must get
the matter over, and that too without any hesitation or refusal. That
ought to be and must be done.


                                  XXV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July 12_, B.C. _45_]

About Andromenes I thought exactly what you say, for you would have
known and told me. However, you have written such a lot about Brutus
that you say nothing of yourself. But when do you think he is coming?
For I shall come to Rome on the 14th. What I meant to say in my letter
to

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 158

(sed, quoniam tu te legisse scribis, fui fortasse ἀσαφέστερος), me ex
tuis litteris intellexisse nolle eum me quasi prosequendi sui causa
Romam nunc venire. Sed, quoniam iam adest meus adventus, fac, quaeso, ne
quid eum Idus impediant, quo minus suo commodo in Tusculano sit. Nec
enim ad tabulam eum desideraturus eram (in tali enim negotio cur tu unus
non satis es?), sed ad testamentum volebam, quod iam malo alio die, ne
ob eam causam Romam venisse videar. Scripsi igitur ad Brutum iam illud,
quod putassem, Idibus nihil opus esse. Velim ergo totum hoc ita
gubernes, ut ne minima quidem re ulla Bruti commodum impediamus.

Sed quid est tandem, quod perhorrescas, quia tuo periculo iubeam libros
dari Varroni? Etiam nunc si dubitas, fac, ut sciamus. Nihil est enim
illis elegantius. Volo Varronem, praesertim cum ille desideret; sed est,
ut scis,

[Sidenote: _Iliad_, xi. 654]

             "δεινὸς ἀνήρ· τάχα κεν καὶ ἀναίτιον αἰτιόῳτο."

Ita mihi saepe occurrit vultus eius querentis fortasse vel hoc, meas
partis in iis libris copiosius defensas esse quam suas, quod me hercule
non esse intelleges, si quando in Epirum veneris. Nam nunc Alexionis
epistulis cedimus. Sed tamen ego non despero probatum iri Varroni, et
id, quoniam impensam fecimus in macrocolla, facile patior teneri. Sed,
etiam atque etiam dico, tuo periculo fiet. Quare, si addubitas, ad
Brutum transeamus; est enim is quoque Antiochius.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 159

Brutus was that I had gathered from your note that he did not wish me to
come to Rome now just to pay my respects to him—but, as you say you have
read the letter, perhaps I was not quite clear. However, as I am just on
the point of coming, please see that my presence on the 15th does not
prevent his coming to Tusculum at his convenience. For I shall not want
him at the auction—surely in such a business you alone will be enough:
but I do want him when I make my will. That I would rather postpone for
another day now, so as not to seem to have come to Rome expressly for
that purpose. So I have written to Brutus now that I shall not want him,
as I had thought, on the 15th. I should like you to look after all this
and see that we don't inconvenience Brutus in the least.

But what on earth is the reason why you are so frightened at my bidding
you send the books to Varro on your own responsibility? Even now, if you
have any doubts, let me know. Nothing could be more finished than they
are. I want Varro, especially as he desires it: but, as you know, he is
"a fearsome man; the blameless he would blame." I often picture him to
myself complaining of this perhaps, that my side in the books is more
fully defended than his own, though I assure you, if ever you come to
Epirus, I will convince you it is not. For at present I have to give way
to Alexio's[133] letters. However, I don't despair of winning Varro's
approval; and, as I have gone to the expense of a large paper copy, I
should like to stick to my plan. But I repeat again, it must be on your
responsibility. So, if you have doubts, let us change to Brutus: he is
also a

Footnote 133:

  Atticus' steward.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 160

O Academiam volaticam et sui similem! modo huc, modo illuc. Sed, quaeso,
epistula mea ad Varronem valdene tibi placuit? Male mi sit, si umquam
quicquam tam enitar. Ergo ne Tironi quidem dictavi, qui totas περιοχὰς
persequi solet, sed Spintharo syllabatim.


                                  XXVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano prid. Id. Mai. a. 709_]

De Vergili parte valde probo. Sic ages igitur. Et quidem id erit primum,
proximum Clodiae. Quodsi neutrum, metuo, ne turbem et inruam in Drusum.
Intemperans sum in eius rei cupiditate, quam nosti. Itaque revolvor
identidem in Tusculanum. Quidvis enim potius, quam ut non hac aestate
absolvatur.

Ego, ut tempus est nostrum, locum habeo nullum, ubi facilius esse possim
quam Asturae. Sed, quia, qui mecum sunt, credo, quod maestitiam meam non
ferunt, domum properant, etsi poteram remanere, tamen, ut scripsi tibi,
proficiscar hinc, ne relictus videar. Quo autem? Lanuvio conor equidem
in Tusculanum. Sed faciam te statim certiorem. Tu litteras conficies.
Equidem credibile non est quantum scribam, quin etiam noctibus. Nihil
enim somni. Heri etiam effeci epistulam ad Caesarem; tibi enim placebat.
Quam non fuit malum scribi, si forte opus

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 161

follower of Antiochus. O that fickle Academy, always the same, now one
thing, now another.[134] But pray tell me, were you very pleased with my
letter to Varro. May I be hanged if I ever take so much trouble with
anything again. So I did not even dictate it to Tiro, who can follow
whole sentences as dictated, but syllable by syllable to Spintharus.

Footnote 134:

  Like Cicero's treatise, which had already been rewritten twice: cf.
  XIII. 16.


                                  XXVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 14_, B.C. _45_]

About Vergilius'[135] share I approve; so arrange it like that. And
indeed it will be my first choice, next to Clodia's. If neither, I fear
I shall run amuck and make a dash for Drusus. As you know, I have lost
control of myself in my desire for this. So I keep coming back to the
idea of my place at Tusculum. For anything is better than not getting it
finished this summer.

Footnote 135:

  Vergilius was one of the four co-heirs of Scapula. Cf. XII. 38a.

Under the present circumstances I am as comfortable at Astura as I could
be anywhere. But as those who are with me are in a hurry to go home, I
suppose because they cannot put up with my melancholy, though I might
remain, I shall leave here, as I told you, so as not to seem deserted.
But where am I to go? From Lanuvium I am trying to bring myself to go to
Tusculum. But I will let you know soon. Please write the letters. You
wouldn't believe how much writing I get done by night as well as day,
for I cannot sleep. Yesterday I even composed a letter to Caesar, as you
desired. There was no harm in writing it in case you thought it
necessary: as

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 162

esse putares; ut quidem nunc est, nihil sane est necesse mittere. Sed id
quidem, ut tibi videbitur. Mittam tamen ad te exemplum fortasse Lanuvio,
nisi forte Romam. Sed eras scies.


                                 XXVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VIII K. Iun. a. 709_]

De epistula ad Caesarem nobis vero semper rectissime placuit, ut isti
ante legerent. Aliter enim fuissemus et in hos inofficiosi, et in nosmet
ipsos, si illum offensuri fuimus, paene periculosi. Isti autem ingenue;
mihique gratum, quod, quid sentirent, non reticuerunt, illud vero vel
optime, quod ita multa mutari volunt, ut mihi de integro scribendi causa
non sit. Quamquam de Parthico bello quid spectare debui, nisi quod illum
velle arbitrabar? Quod enim aliud argumentum epistulae nostrae nisi
κολακεία fuit? An, si ea, quae optima putarem, suadere voluissem, oratio
mihi defuisset? Totis igitur litteris nihil opus est. Ubi enim ἐπίτευγμα
magnum nullum fieri possit, ἀπότευγμα vel non magnum molestum futurum
sit, quid opus est παρακινδυνεύειν? praesertim cum illud occurrat,
illum, cum antea nihil scripserim, existimaturum me nisi toto bello
confecto nihil scripturum fuisse. Atque etiam vereor, ne putet me hoc
quasi Catonis μείλιγμα esse voluisse. Quid quaeris? valde me paenitebat,
nec mihi in hac quidem re quicquam magis ut vellem accidere potuit, quam
quod σπουδὴ nostra non est probata. Incidissimus etiam in illos, in eis
in cognatum tuum.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 163

things are, there is certainly no need to send it. But let that be as
you like. However, I will send you a copy, perhaps from Lanuvium, unless
I happen to come to Rome. But you shall know to-morrow.


                                 XXVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 25_, B.C. _45_]

As for the letter to Caesar, I was always ready to let your friends read
it first. If I had not been, I should not have done my duty by them, and
should very nearly have imperilled myself, if I were likely to offend
him. But they have acted frankly, and I am thankful to them for not
concealing their feelings; but the best thing of all is that they want
to make so many alterations that there is no sense in my writing it all
over again. However, what view ought I to have taken of the Parthian war
except what I thought he wanted? Indeed what other purpose had my letter
save to kowtow to him? Do you suppose I should have been at a loss for
words, if I had wanted to give him the advice which I really thought
best? So the whole letter is unnecessary. For, when I cannot make a
_coup_, and a fiasco, however slight, would be unpleasant, why should I
run unnecessary risk? Especially as it occurs to me that, as I have not
written before, he would think I should not have written until the whole
war were over. Besides I am afraid he may think it is to sugar the pill
of my Cato. In fact I am very sorry I wrote it, and nothing could suit
my wishes better than that they do disapprove of my zeal. I should have
fallen foul of[136] Caesar's party, and among them your relative.

Footnote 136:

  Or "come into contact with." _Cognatum_ refers to young Quintus.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 164

Sed redeo ad hortos. Plane illuc te ire nisi tuo magno commodo nolo;
nihil enim urget. Quicquid erit, operam in Faberio ponamus. De die tamen
auctionis, si quid scies. Eum, qui e Cumano venerat, quod et plane
valere Atticam nuntiabat et litteras se habere aiebat, statim ad te
misi.


                                 XXVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VII K. Iun. a. 709_]

Hortos quoniam hodie eras inspecturus, quid visum tibi sit, eras
scilicet. De Faberio autem, cum venerit. De epistula ad Ceasaremiurato,
mihi crede, non possum; nec me turpitudo deterret, etsi maxime debebat.
Quam enim turpis est adsentatio, cum vivere ipsum turpe sit nobis! Sed,
ut coepi, non me hoc turpe deterret. Ac vellem quidem (essem enim, qui
esse debebam), sed in mentem nihil venit. Nam, quae sunt ad Alexandrum
hominum eloquentium et doctorum suasiones, vides, quibus in rebus
versentur. Adulescentem incensum cupiditate verissimae gloriae,
cupientem sibi aliquid consilii dari, quod ad laudem sempiternam
valeret, cohortantur ad decus. Non deest oratio; ego quid possum? Tamen
nescio quid e quercu exsculpseram, quod videretur simile simulacri. In
eo quia non nulla erant paulo meliora quam ea, quae fiunt et facta sunt,
reprehenduntur; quod me minime paenitet. Si enim pervenissent istae
litterae, mihi crede, nos paeniteret. Quid? tu non

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 165

But to return to the gardens. I don't in the least want you to go there,
unless it is quite convenient to you: for there is no hurry. Whatever
happens let us direct our efforts towards Faberius. However send me the
date of the auction, if you know it. I have sent this man, who came from
Cumae, straight on to you, as he said Attica was quite well and he had
letters.


                                 XXVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 26_, B.C. _45_]

As you are going to look at the garden to-day, I shall of course hear
from you to-morrow what you think of it; and about Faberius, when he has
come. About the letter to Caesar, I give you my word of honour I cannot;
it is not the shame of the thing that prevents me, though that is just
what ought. Ah, how shameful is flattery, when life alone is a disgrace!
But, as I was beginning to say, it is not the shame of it that prevents
me—I only wish it were, for then I should be the man I ought to be—but I
cannot think of anything to write. Just consider the subjects of the
letters of advice addressed to Alexander by men of eloquence and
learning. Here was a youth fired by a desire for the truest glory and
desiring to have some advice given him on the subject of eternal fame,
and they exhort him to follow honour. There is plenty to say on that:
but what can I say? However, from hard material I had rough hewn
something that seemed to me to take shape. Because there were a few
touches in it a little better than the actual facts past or present,
fault is found with them; and I don't regret it a bit. For, if the
letter had reached its destination, believe me, I should have regretted
it. Why, don't you

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 166

vides ipsum illum Aristoteli discipulum summo ingenio, summa modestia,
posteaquam rex appellatus sit, superbum, crudelem, immoderatum fuisse?
Quid? tu hunc de pompa Quirini contubernalem his nostris moderatis
epistulis laetaturum putas? Ille vero potius non scripta desideret quam
scripta non probet. Postremo ut volet. Abiit illud, quod tum me
stimulabat, cum tibi dabam πρόβλημα Ἀρχιμήδειον. Multo mehercule magis
nunc opto casum illum, quem tum timebam, vel quem libebit.

Nisi quid te aliud impediet, mi optato veneris. Nicias a Dolabella magno
opere arcessitus (legi enim litteras), etsi invito me, tamen eodem me
auctore, profectus est.

Hoc manu mea. Cum quasi alias res quaererem de philologis e Nicia,
incidimus in Talnam. Ille de ingenio nihil nimis, modestum et frugi. Sed
hoc mihi non placuit. Se scire aiebat ab eo nuper petitam Cornificiam,
Q. filiam, vetulam sane et multarum nuptiarum; non esse probatum
mulieribus, quod ita reperirent, rem non maiorem ¯DCCC¯. Hoc putavi te
scire oportere.


                                  XXIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VI K Iun. a. 709_]

De hortis ex tuis litteris cognovi et Chrysippo. In villa, cuius
insulsitatem bene noram, video nihil

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 167

see that even that pupil of Aristotle, in spite of his high ability and
his high character, became proud, cruel, and ungovernable, after he got
the title of king? How do you suppose this puppet messmate of
Quirinus[137] will like my moderate letters? Let him rather look for
what I do not write than disapprove of what I have written. In short let
it be as he pleases. What was spurring me on when I put that insoluble
problem[138] before you has all gone now. Upon my word now I should far
rather welcome the misfortune I feared then or any other.

Footnote 137:

  Caesar. Cf. _Att._ XII. 45, 3.

Footnote 138:

  What to write to Caesar. Cf. _Att._ XII. 40, 2.

If there is nothing to prevent you, come to me and welcome. Nicias at
Dolabella's urgent request (for I read the letter) has gone, against my
will though not against my advice.

The rest I have written myself. When I was discussing men of learning
with Nicias, we chanced to speak of Talna. He had not much to say for
his intelligence, though he gave him a good and steady character. But
there was one thing that seemed to me unsatisfactory. He said he knew he
had lately sought in marriage Cornificia, Quintus' daughter, though
quite an old woman and married more than once before; but the ladies
would not agree as they found he was not worth more than 7,000
guineas.[139] I thought you ought to know this.

Footnote 139:

  800,000 sesterces.


                                  XXIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 27_, B.C. _45_]

I have heard all about the gardens from your letter and from Chrysippus.
I was well aware of the bad taste shown in the house, and I see there

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 168

aut pauca mutata; balnearia tamen laudat maiora, de minoribus ait
hiberna effici posse. Tecta igitur ambulatiuncula addenda est; quam ut
tantam faciamus, quantam in Tusculano fecimus, prope dimidio minoris
constabit isto loco. Ad id autem, quod volumus, ἀφίδρυμα nihil aptius
videtur quam lucus, quem ego noram; sed celebritatem nullam tum habebat,
nunc audio maximam. Nihil est, quod ego malim. In hoc τὸν τῦφόν μου πρὸς
θεῶν τροποφόρησον. Reliquum est, si Faberius nobis nomen illud explicat,
noli quaerere, quanti; Othonem vincas volo. Nec tamen insaniturum illum
puto; nosse enim mihi hominem videor. Ita male autem audio ipsum esse
tractatum, ut mihi ille emptor non esse videatur. Quid enim? pateretur?
Sed quid argumentor? Si Faberianum explicas, emamus vel magno; si minus,
ne parvo quidem possumus. Clodiam igitur. A qua ipsa ob eam causam
sperare videor, quod et multo minoris sunt, et Dolabellae nomen tam
expeditum videtur, ut etiam repraesentatione confidam. De hortis satis.
Cras aut te aut causam; quam quidem puto[140] futuram Faberianam. Sed,
si poteris.

Footnote 140:

  puto _added by Wesenberg_.

Ciceronis epistulam tibi remisi. O te ferreum, qui illius periculis non
moveris! Me quoque accusat. Eam tibi epistulam misi semissem.[141] Nam
illam alteram

Footnote 141:

  misi semissem _Purser_: misissem _MSS._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 169

has been little or no alteration; however, he praises the larger bath
and thinks the smaller could be made into a winter snuggery. So a
covered passage would have to be added, and, if I made one the same size
as that at my place at Tusculum, the cost would be about half as much in
that district. However, for the erection we want to make nothing could
be more suitable than the grove, which I used to know well; then it was
not at all frequented, now I hear it is very much so. There is nothing I
should prefer. In this, humour my whim, in heaven's name. For the rest,
if Faberius pays that debt, don't bother about the cost; I want you to
outbid Otho: and I don't think he will bid wildly, for I fancy I know
the man. Besides I hear he has had such bad luck that I doubt if he will
buy. For would he put up with it, if he could help it?[142] But what is
the good of talking? If you get the money from Faberius, let us buy even
at a high price; if not, we cannot even at a low. So then we must fall
back on Clodia. In her case I see more grounds for hope, as her property
is worth much less, and Dolabella's debt seems so safe that I feel
confident of being able to pay in ready money. Enough about the gardens.
To-morrow I shall either see you or hear the reason why not. I expect
that will be the business with Faberius. But come, if you can.

Footnote 142:

  Probably, as Manutius suggests, this means "would he endure the wrong
  he has suffered, if he had any means left."

I am sending young Quintus' letter. How hard-hearted of you not to
tremble at his hair-breadth escapes. He complains about me too. I have
sent you half the letter. The other half about his

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 170

de rebus gestis eodem exemplo puto. In Cumanum hodie misi tabellarium.
Ei dedi tuas ad Vestorium, quas Pharnaci dederas.


                                  XXX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano V K. Iun. post ep. XXXI a. 709_]

Commodum ad te miseram Demean, cum Eros ad me venit. Sed in eius
epistula nihil erat novi nisi auctionem biduum. Ab ea igitur, ut
scribis, et velim confecto negotio Faberiano; quem quidem negat Eros
hodie, cras mane putat. A te colendus est; istae autem κολακεῖαι non
longe absunt a scelere. Te, ut spero, perendie.

Mi, sicunde potes, erues, qui decem legati Mummio fuerint. Polybius non
nominat. Ego memini Albinum consularem et Sp. Mummium; videor audisse ex
Hortensio Tuditanum. Sed in Libonis annali XIIII annis post praetor est
factus Tuditanus quam consul Mummius. Non sane quadrat. Volo aliquem
Olympiae aut ubi visum πολιτικὸν σύλλογον more Dicaearchi, familiaris
tui.


                                  XXXI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano eodem die quo ep. XXX paulo ante a. 709_]

V Kal. mane accepi a Demea litteras pridie datas, ex quibus aut hodie
aut eras exspectare te deberem. Sed, ut opinor, idem ego, qui exspecto
tuum adventum, morabor te. Non enim puto tam expeditum Faberianum
negotium futurum, etiamsi est futurum,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 171

adventures I think you have in duplicate. I have sent a messenger to-day
to Cumae. I have given him your letter to Vestorius, which you had given
to Pharnaces.


                                  XXX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 28_, B.C. _45_]

I had just sent Demeas to you, when Eros arrived. But in his letter
there was no news except that the auction lasts two days. So you will
come after it, as you say, and I hope the business with Faberius will be
settled. Eros thinks he will not settle up to-day, but will to-morrow
morning. You must be polite to him; though such kowtowing is almost
criminal. I hope you will come the day after to-morrow.

Dig out for me from somewhere, if you can, the names of Mummius' ten
legates. Polybius does not give them. I remember Albinus the ex-consul
and Sp. Mummius; and I think Hortensius told me Tuditanus. But in Libo's
annals Tuditanus was praetor fourteen years after Mummius' consulship.
That does not square at all. I am thinking of writing a kind of
political conference, held at Olympia or wherever you like, like that of
your friend Dicaearchus.


                                  XXXI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 28_, B.C. _45_]

On the 28th in the morning Demeas delivered a letter dated the day
before, from which I ought to expect you either to-day or to-morrow.
But, I suppose, I who am looking forward to your coming, shall be the
very person who will delay it. For I don't expect the business with
Faberius will be so far settled, even if it is to be settled, that it
will not

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 172

ut non habeat aliquid morae. Cum poteris igitur. Quoniam etiamnum abes,
Dicaearchi, quos scribis, libros sane velim mi mittas, addas etiam
κατάβασεως.

De epistula ad Caesarem κέκρικα; atqui[143] id ipsum, quod isti aiunt
illum scribere, se nisi constitutis rebus non iturum in Parthos, idem
ego suadebam in illa epistula. Utrum liberet, facere posse auctore me.
Hoc enim ille exspectat videlicet neque est facturus quicquam nisi de
meo consilio. Obsecro, abiciamus ista et semiliberi saltem simus; quod
adsequemur et tacendo et latendo.

Footnote 143:

  atqui _Wesenberg_: atque _MSS._

Sed adgredere Othonem, ut scribis. Confice, mi Attice, istam rem. Nihil
enim aliud reperio, ubi et in foro non sim et tecum esse possim. Quanti
autem, hoc mihi venit in mentem. C. Albanius proximus est vicinus. Is
CIↃ iugerum de M. Pilio emit, ut mea memoria est, HS ¯CXV¯. Omnia
scilicet nunc minoris. Sed accedit cupiditas, in qua praeter Othonem non
puto nos ullum adversarium habituros. Sed eum ipsum tu poteris movere,
facilius etiam, si Canum haberes. O gulam insulsam! Pudet me patris.
Rescribes, si quid voles.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 173

cause some delay. So come when you can. Since you are still away, I
should like you to send me the books of Dicaearchus, which you mention,
with the _Descent_.[144]

Footnote 144:

  So called because it described a visit to the cave of Trophonius in
  Arcadia.

As for the letter to Caesar I have made up my mind; and yet precisely
what they say he says in his letter, that he will not go against the
Parthians until affairs are arranged here, is what I advised in my
letter. I told him he could do whichever he chose with my full leave.
For of course he wants that and won't do anything without my advice. For
heaven's sake let us give up flattery and be at least half-free; and
that we can manage by keeping quiet and out of sight.

But approach Otho, as you say, and finish that business, my dear
Atticus. For I don't see any other way of keeping away from the forum
and yet being with you. As to the price, this has just occurred to me.
The nearest neighbour is C. Albanius. He bought some 600 acres[145] of
M. Pilius, so far as I can recollect for £110,000.[146] Of course
everything has gone down in value now. But on the other side counts our
eagerness to purchase, though I don't suppose we shall have anyone
bidding against us except Otho. Him however you can influence
personally, and could still more easily, if you had Canus with you. What
senseless gluttony![147] Shame on his father! Answer, if you want to say
anything.

Footnote 145:

  1,000 _jugera_.

Footnote 146:

  11,500,000 sesterces.

Footnote 147:

  Probably this refers to some act of young Quintus Cicero.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 174


                                 XXXII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV K. Iun. a. 709_]

Alteram a te epistulam cum hodie accepissem, nolui te una mea contentum.
Tu vero age, quod scribis, de Faberio. In eo enim totum est positum id,
quod cogitamus; quae cogitatio si non incidisset, mihi crede, istuc ut
cetera non laborarem. Quam ob rem, ut facis (istuc enim addi nihil
potest), urge, insta, perfice.

Dicaearchi περὶ ψυχῆς utrosque velim mittas et καταβάσεως. Τριπολιτικὸν
non invenio et epistulam eius, quam ad Aristoxenum misit. Tres eos
libros maxime nunc vellem; apti essent ad id, quod cogito. Torquatus
Romae est. Misi, ut tibi daretur. Catulum et Lucullum, ut opinor, antea.
His libris nova prohoemia sunt addita, quibus eorum uterque laudatur.
Eas litteras volo habeas, et sunt quaedam alia. Et, quod ad te de decem
legatis scripsi, parum intellexisti, credo, quia διὰ σημείων scripseram.
De C. Tuditano enim quaerebam, quem ex Hortensio audieram fuisse in
decem. Eum video in Libonis praetorem P. Popilio, P. Rupilio coss. Annis
XIIII ante, quam praetor factus est, legatus esse potuisset, nisi
admodum sero quaestor esset factus? quod non arbitror. Video

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 175


                                 XXXII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 29_, B.C. _45_]

As I have received two letters from you to-day, I did not think it right
that you should content yourself with only one of mine. Pray do as you
say about Faberius. For on that depends entirely what I am thinking of.
And, if that idea had never occurred to me, believe me I should not
bother about that any more than anything else. So continue your
energy—for you cannot add to it—and push on and finish the matter.

Please send me Dicaearchus' two books _About the Soul_ and the
_Descent_. I can't find the _Mixed Constitution_[148] and the letter he
sent to Aristoxenus. I should much like to have those three books now;
they would bear on what I am planning. Torquatus[149] is in Rome. I have
sent orders for it to be given to you. Catulus and Lucullus I believe
you have already. I have added new prefaces to the books, in which each
of them is mentioned with honour. Those compositions I should like you
to have, and there are some others too. What I said about the ten
legates, you did not fully understand, I suppose because I wrote it in
shorthand.[150] I was asking about C. Tuditanus, who Hortensius told me
was one of them. I see in Libo that he was praetor in the consulship of
P. Popilius and P. Rupilius. Could he have been legate fourteen years
before he was praetor, unless he was very late in getting the
quaestorship? I don't think that was the case; for

Footnote 148:

  So called because it represented the ideal State as a mixture of
  monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy.

Footnote 149:

  _i.e._ _De Finibus_, Bk. I., in which Torquatus is the chief speaker.
  Similarly, Catulus and Lucullus are the first two books of the
  _Academica_ in its first form.

Footnote 150:

  Or _demi-mots_, as Tyrrell renders it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 176

enim curules magistratus eum legitimis annis perfacile cepisse.
Postumium autem, cuius statuam in Isthmo meminisse te dicis, nesciebam
fuisse. Is autem est, qui cos. cum L. Lucullo fuit; quem tu mihi
addidisti sane ad illum σύλλογον personam idoneam. Videbis igitur, si
poteris, ceteros, ut possimus πομπεῦσαι καὶ τοῖς προσώποις.


                                 XXXIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano III Non. Iun. a. 709_]

O neglegentiam miram! Semelne putas mihi dixisse Balbum et Faberium
professionem relatam? qui etiam eorum iussu miserim, qui profiteretur.
Ita enim oportere dicebant. Professus est Philotimus libertus. Nosti,
credo, librarium. Sed scribes et quidem confectum. Ad Faberium, ut tibi
placet, litteras misi, cum Balbo autem puto te aliquid fecisse
hodie[151] in Capitolio. In Vergilio mihi nulla est δυσωπία. Nec enim
eius causa sane debeo, et, si emero, quid erit, quod postulet? Sed
videbis, ne is tum sit in Africa ut Caelius.

Footnote 151:

  hodie _Bosius_: H. _MSS._: fuisti enim _Elmore_.

De nomine tu videbis cum Cispio; sed, si Plancus destinat, tum habet res
difficultatem. Te ad me venire uterque nostrum cupit; sed ista res nullo
modo relinquenda est. Othonem quod speras posse

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 177

I see he won the curule offices quite easily in the proper years. But I
did not know that Postumius, whose statue you say you remember in the
Isthmus, was one of them. He was the man who was consul with L.
Lucullus; and it is a very suitable person you have added to my
conference. So please look up the others too, if you can, that I may
make a show with my _dramatis personæ_, as well as my subject.


                                 XXXIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 3_, B.C. _45_]

What extraordinary carelessness! Do you think it was only once that I
have been told by Balbus and Faberius that the return[152] had been
made? Why it was at their suggestion that I sent a man to make it, for
they said I ought to do so. It was my freedman Philotimus who made the
return; you know him, I think, a copyist. But you must write and let me
know it is finished. I have sent a letter as you advise to Faberius.
With Balbus I think you have made some arrangement in the Capitol
to-day. About Vergilius I have no scruples; for there is no reason why I
should have in his case; and, if I buy, what claim will he have? But see
that he may not be in Africa then like Caelius.[153]

Footnote 152:

  Possibly a statement of income before the next census; or perhaps some
  formality in the transference of a debt due from Faberius to Cicero.

Footnote 153:

  Vergilius had sided with Pompey in Spain, and Cicero apparently is
  afraid that, like Caelius, for whom cf. XIII. 3, he may not be in
  Italy when applied to for payment. But the reading and the sense are
  uncertain.

The debt you must look into with Cispius; but, if Plancus intends to
bid, there will be difficulties. That you should come to me would suit
us both, but that business cannot possibly be thrown up. It is

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 178

vinci, sane bene narras. De aestimatione, ut scribis, cum agere
coeperimus; etsi nihil scripsit nisi de modo agri. Cum Pisone, si quid
poterit. Dicaearchi librum accepi et καταβάσεως exspecto.

... negotium dederis, reperiet ex eo libro, in quo sunt senatus consulta
Cn. Cornelio, L. Mummio coss. De Tuditano autem quod putas, εὔλογον est
tum illum, quoniam fuit ad Corinthum (non enim temere dixit Hortensius),
aut quaestorem aut tribunum mil. fuisse, idque potius credo. Tu de[154]
Antiocho scire poteris videlicet[155] etiam, quo anno quaestor aut
tribunus mil. fuerit; si neutrum, saltem,[156] in praefectis an in
contubernalibus fuerit, modo fuerit in eo bello.

Footnote 154:

  fuisse ... de _as Ernesti_: idque potius fuisse. sed credo te de _M_.

Footnote 155:

  videlicet _Schmidt_: vide _MSS._

Footnote 156:

  saltem _Gurlitt_: ea de _M_: cadet (et) _ZO^1_, _L_ (_marg._): eadem
  _O^2_.


                                XXXIIIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VII Id. Quint. a. 709_]

De Varrone loquebamur: lupus in fabula. Venit enim ad me et quidem id
temporis, ut retinendus esset. Sed ego ita egi, ut non "scinderem
paenulam" (memini enim tuum): et multi erant nosque imparati. Quid
refert? Paulo post C. Capito cum T. Carrinate. Horum ego vix attigi
paenulam. Tamen remanserunt, ceciditque belle. Sed casu

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 179

welcome news that you think we can beat Otho. As you say about the
assignment, when we begin to negotiate; though he has not mentioned
anything except the extent of the ground. Discuss it with Piso in case
he can do anything. I have received Dicaearchus' book and am expecting
his _Descent_.

(If you) will commission someone, he will find out ... from the book
containing the decrees passed in the consulship of Cn. Cornelius and L.
Mummius. Your idea about Tuditanus is reasonable enough, he was either
quaestor or military tribune, since he was at Corinth at the time and
Hortensius was not speaking at random; and I think you are right. You
will be able to find out from Antiochus of course in what year he was
quaestor or military tribune. If he was neither, then he would at least
have been among the prefects or on the staff, provided he was in the war
at all.


                                XXXIIIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July 9_, B.C. _45_]

We were talking of Varro: talk of the devil, you know, for here he came
and at such an hour that I had to ask him to stop. But I did not cling
so closely to him as to "tear his cloak" (for I remember that
phrase[157] of yours), and there were a lot of them and I was
unprepared. But what does that matter? Just afterwards came C. Capito
and T. Carrinas. Their cloaks I hardly touched; but they stayed and it
turned out all right. By chance Capito began

Footnote 157:

  I follow Reid and Shuckburgh in referring this to the preceding phrase
  and not to the following.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 180

sermo a Capitone de urbe augenda, a ponte Mulvio Tiberim duci secundum
montes Vaticanos, campum Martium coaedificari, illum autem campum
Vaticanum fieri quasi Martium campum. "Quid ais?" inquam; "at ego ad
tabulam, ut, si recte possem, Scapulanos hortos." "Cave facias," inquit;
"nam ista lex perferetur; vult enim Caesar." Audire me facile passus
sum, fieri autem moleste fero. Sed tu quid ais? Quamquam quid quaero?
Nosti diligentiam Capitonis in rebus novis perquirendis. Non concedit
Camillo. Facies me igitur certiorem de Idibus. Ista enim me res
adducebat. Eo adiunxeram ceteras, quas consequi tamen biduo aut triduo
post facile potero. Te tamen in via confici minime volo; quin etiam
Dionysio ignosco. De Bruto quod scribis, feci, ut ei liberum esset, quod
ad me attineret. Scripsi enim ad eum heri Idibus eius opera mihi nihil
opus esse.


                                 XXXIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae VI K. Sext. a. 709_]

Asturam veni VIII Kal. vesperi.[158] Vitandi enim caloris causa Lanuvi
tris horas acquieveram. Tu velim, si grave non erit, efficias, ne ante
Nonas mihi illuc veniendum sit (id potes per Egnatium Maximum),

Footnote 158:

  vesperi _Schmidt_: iul. _M_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 181

talking of the improvements of the city: the course of the Tiber is to
be diverted from the Mulvian bridge along the Vatican hills; the Campus
Martius to be built over, and the Vatican plain to be a sort of Campus
Martius. "What's that?" I said. "Why, I was going to the sale to buy
Scapula's gardens, if I could safely." "Don't you do it," he told me;
"for the law will be passed: Caesar wants it." I was not disturbed at
hearing it: but I should be annoyed, if they do it. What have you got to
say about it? However I need not ask. You know how eager a news-monger
Capito is: not even Camillus can beat him at that. So you must let me
know about the auction on the 15th: for that is what is bringing me to
town. I have combined some other things with it: but those I can easily
do two or three days later. However I don't want you to be tired out
with travelling: nay, I even excuse Dionysius. As to what you say about
Brutus, I have left it open so far as I am concerned: for yesterday I
wrote and told him that I should have no need of his help on the 15th.


                                 XXXIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, July 27_, B.C. _45_]

I reached Astura on the evening of the 25th: for to avoid the heat of
the day I rested three hours at Lanuvium. I should like you, if it is no
trouble, to contrive that I need not come to Rome before the 5th of next
month. You can manage it through Egnatius Maximus. The chief point is
that you

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 182

illud in primis, cum Publilio me apsente[159] conficias. De quo quae
fama sit, scribes.

Footnote 159:

  me apsente _Müller_: mea pene absente _M_.

[Sidenote: Terence, _Andr._ 185]

                      "Id populus curat scilicet!"

Non mehercule arbitror; etenim haec decantata erat fabula. Sed complere
paginam volui. Quid plura? ipse enim adsum, nisi quid tu prorogas.
Scripsi enim ad te de hortis.


                              XXXV, XXXVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano III Id. Quint. a. 709_]

O rem indignam! Gentilis tuus urbem auget, quam hoc biennio primum
vidit, et ei parum magna visa est, quae etiam ipsum capere potuerit. Hac
de re igitur exspecto litteras tuas. Varroni scribis te, simul ac
venerit. Dati igitur iam sunt, nec tibi integrum est, hui, si scias,
quanto periculo tuo! Aut fortasse litterae meae te retardarunt; nisi eas
nondum legeras, cum has proximas scripsisti. Scire igitur aveo, quo modo
res se habeat.

De Bruti amore vestraque ambulatione etsi mihi nihil novi adfers, sed
idem quod saepe, tamen hoc audio libentius quo saepius, eoque mihi
iucundius est, quod tu eo laetaris, certiusque eo est, quod a te
dicitur.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 183

should settle with Publilius in my absence:[160] and about that you will
let me know what people say. "Of course the world is all agog with
that!" On my honour I don't think so; for the nine days' wonder is over.
But I wanted to fill the page. What need of more: for I am almost with
you, unless you put me off for a bit. For I have written to you about
the gardens.

Footnote 160:

  About Cicero's divorce from Publilia.


                              XXXV, XXXVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July 13_, B.C. _45_]

What a shame! A countryman of yours[161] is enlarging the city, which he
had never seen two years ago, and he thinks it too small to hold the
great man alone. On that point then I am expecting a letter from you.
You say you will present my book to Varro, as soon as he arrives. So
they are already given and you have no choice left. Ah, if you but knew
what a risk you are running! Or perhaps my letter stopped you, unless
you had not read it, when you wrote your last letter. So I am eager to
know how the matter stands.

Footnote 161:

  _i.e._ an Athenian.

As to Brutus' affection and your walk, though you give me no actual
news, but only a repetition of what has often happened, yet the more
often I hear it, the gladder I am; and I find it the more gratifying,
because you enjoy it, and the more certain, because you tell me of it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 184


                                 XXXVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV Non. Sext. a. 709_]

Has alteras hodie litteras. De Xenonis nomine et de Epiroticis ¯XXXX¯
nihil potest fieri nec commodius nec aptius, quam ut scribis. Id erat
locutus mecum eodem modo Balbus minor. Nihil novi sane nisi Hirtium cum
Quinto acerrime pro me litigasse; omnibus eum locis furere maximeque in
conviviis cum multa de me tum redire ad patrem; nihil autem ab eo tam
ἀξιοπίστως dici quam alienissimos nos esse a Caesare; fidem nobis
habendam non esse, me vero etiam cavendum (φοβερὸν ἂν ἦν, nisi viderem
scire regem me animi nihil habere), Ciceronem vero meum vexari; sed id
quidem arbitratu suo. Laudationem Porciae gaudeo me ante dedisse Leptae
tabellario, quam tuas acceperim litteras. Eam tu igitur, si me amas,
curabis, si modo mittetur, isto modo mittendam Domitio et Bruto.

De gladiatoribus, de ceteris, quae scribis ἀνεμοφόρητα, facies me
cotidie certiorem. Velim, si tibi videtur, appelles Balbum et Offilium.
De auctione proscribenda equidem locutus sum cum Balbo. Placebat (puto
conscripta habere Offilium omnia; habet et Balbus) sed Balbo placebat
propinquum diem et Romae; si Caesar moraretur, posse diem differri. Sed
is quidem adesse videtur. Totum igitur considera; placet enim Vestorio.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 185


                                 XXXVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 2_, B.C. _45_]

This is the second letter to-day. About Xeno's debt and the £40[162]
owing to you in Epirus, things could not happen more conveniently than
you say they are happening in your letter. Balbus the younger suggested
the same to me the other day. I have no news except that Hirtius has
been taking my part most valiantly in arguments against young Quintus.
The latter is raving about me everywhere, especially at dinner-parties,
and then he falls back on his father: nothing he says is so likely to be
believed as that we are utterly irreconcilable to Caesar; that we are
not to be trusted, and that I ought to be held in suspicion, which would
have been terrifying, if were I not aware that the king knows I have no
spirit left. He says too that my son is being bullied by me: but that he
may say as much as he likes. I am glad I sent the funeral oration of
Porcia to Lepta the messenger before I got your letter. So, as you love
me, have it sent to Domitius and Brutus in the form you suggest, if it
is to be sent at all.

Footnote 162:

  4,000 sesterces.

About the gladiatorial games and the things which you call airy nothings
send me news day by day. I should like you to apply to Balbus and
Offilius, if you think fit. About giving notice of the auction I have
spoken with Balbus. He agreed—I imagine Offilius has a complete list,
and so has Balbus—well Balbus agreed for a day near at hand and for Rome
as the place: if Caesar puts off coming, the day might be deferred. But
he seems to be close at hand. So think it all over; for Vestorius is
content.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 186


                                XXXVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano circ. prid. Non. Sext. a. 709_]

Ante lucem cum scriberem contra Epicureos, de eodem oleo et opera
exaravi nescio quid ad te et ante lucem dedi. Deinde, cum somno repetito
simul cum sole experrectus essem, datur mi epistula a sororis tuae
filio, quam ipsam tibi misi; cuius est principium non sine maxima
contumelia. Sed fortasse οὐκ ἐπέστησεν. Est autem sic: "Ego enim,
quicquid non belle in te dici potest—." Posse vult in me multa dici non
belle, sed ea se negat approbare. Hoc quicquam pote inpurius? Iam cetera
leges (misi enim ad te) iudicabisque. Bruti nostri cotidianis
adsiduisque laudibus, quas ab eo de nobis haberi permulti mihi
renuntiaverunt, commotum istum aliquando scripsisse aliquid ad me credo
et ad te, idque ut sciam facies. Nam ad patrem de me quid scripserit,
nescio, de matre quam pie! "Volueram," inquit, "ut quam plurimum tecum
essem, conduci mihi domum et id ad te scripseram. Neglexisti. Ita minus
multum una erimus. Nam ego istam domum videre non possum; qua de causa,
scis." Hanc autem causam pater odium matris esse dicebat. Nunc me iuva,
mi Attice, consilio, "πότερον δίκᾳ τεῖχος ὕψιον," id est utrum aperte
hominem asperner

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 187


                                XXXVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, circa Aug. 4_, B.C. _45_]

As I was writing against the Epicureans before daybreak, I scribbled
something or other to you by the same lamp and at the same sitting and
despatched it before daybreak. Then as I was getting up with the sun
after another sleep, I get a letter from your sister's son, which I
enclose. The beginning of it is most insulting: but perhaps he did not
stop to think. This is how it runs: "For, whatever there is to be said
to your discredit, I...." He wants me to understand there is plenty to
be said to my discredit, but he does not agree with it. Could anything
be more disgusting? You may read the rest (for I have sent it on) and
judge for yourself. I fancy it is the daily and continual complimentary
remarks which, as I hear from many, our friend Brutus is making about
us, which have provoked him into writing something to me and to you—let
me know if he has written to you. For what he has written to his father
about me I don't know: about his mother how affectionately! "I should
have liked," he says, "to be with you as much as possible and to have a
house taken for me somewhere: and so I told you. You took no notice: so
we shall not be together much: for I cannot bear the sight of your
house: you know why." His father tells me the reason is his hatred of
his mother. Now, Atticus, help me with your advice. "By honest means
shall I the high wall climb?"[163] that is to say shall I openly
renounce and

Footnote 163:

  From a fragment of Pindar, as also the following Greek words.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 188

et respuam "ἢ σκολιαῖς ἀπάταις." Ut enim Pindaro sic "δίχα μοι νόος,
ἀτρέκειαν εἰπεἰν." Omnino moribus meis illud aptius, sed hoc fortasse
temporibus. Tu autem, quod ipse tibi suaseris, idem mihi persuasum
putato. Equidem vereor maxime, ne in Tusculano opprimar. In turba haec
essent faciliora. Utrum igitur Asturae? Quid, si Caesar subito? Iuva me,
quaeso, consilio. Utar eo, quod tu decreveris.


                                 XXXIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano Non. Sext. a. 709_]

O incredibilem vanitatem! ad patrem "domo sibi carendum propter matrem,"
ad matrem plenam pietatis. Hic autem iam languescit et ait sibi illum
iure iratum. Sed utar tuo consilio; "σκολιὰ" enim tibi video placere.
Romam, ut censes, veniam, sed invitus; valde enim in scribendo haereo.
"Brutum," inquis, "eadem." Scilicet; sed, nisi hoc esset, res me ista
non cogeret. Nec enim inde venit, unde mallem, neque diu afuit neque
ullam litteram ad me. Sed tamen scire aveo, qualis ei totius itineris
summa fuerit. Libros mihi, de quibus ad te antea scripsi, velim mittas
et maxime Φαίδρου περὶ θεῶν et περὶ Παλλάδος.[164]

Footnote 164:

  περὶ Παλλάδος _Orelli_: ΠΛΛΙΔΟΣ _MSS._: παντός _Gurlitt_: Ἀπολλοδώρου
  _Hirzel_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 189

abjure the fellow, or shall I act "with wiles"? For, like Pindar's, "my
mind divided cannot truly tell." The first would suit my character best,
of course, but the second perhaps the times. But take it I have made up
my mind to do whatever you have made up your mind to do. I am horribly
afraid of being caught at Tusculum. It would be more comfortable in
company. At Astura then? What if Caesar arrives unexpectedly? Please
assist me with advice. I will do what you decide.


                                 XXXIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 5_, B.C. _45_]

What incredible hypocrisy! To write to his father that "he had no home
owing to his mother," and to his mother a letter full of affection. His
father however is already cooling down and says the son has a right to
be angry with him. But I will follow your advice; for I see "crooked
ways" are what you favour. I will come to Rome, as you think I ought,
though against my will; for I cannot tear myself from my writing. You
say I shall find Brutus on the way: of course, but without this other
reason that would not be strong enough to move me. For he has not come
from the place I should wish, nor has he been long away or sent me any
letter. Still I should like to know the result of his whole journey.
Please send me the books I asked for before, especially Phaedrus _On the
Gods_ and _On Pallas_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 190


                                   XL

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VII aut VI Id. Sext. a. 709_]

Itane? nuntiat Brutus illum ad bonos viros? Εὐαγγέλια. Sed ubi eos? nisi
forte se suspendit. Hic autem, ut stultum[165] est. Ubi igitur
φιλοτέχνημα illud tuum, quod vidi in Parthenone, Ahalam et Brutum? Sed
quid faciat? Illud optime: "Sed ne is quidem, qui omnium flagitiorum
auctor, bene de nostro." At ego verebar, ne etiam Brutus eum diligeret;
ita enim significarat iis litteris, quas ad me: "Ast vellem aliquid
degustasses de fabulis." Sed coram, ut scribis.

Footnote 165:

  stultum _Tunstall_: fultum _MSS._: futilum _Schmidt_.

Etsi quid mi auctor es? advolone an maneo? Equidem et in libris haereo
et illum his excipere nolo; ad quem, ut audio, pater hodie ad Saxa
summa[166] acrimonia. Mirum quam inimicus ibat, ut ego obiurgarem. Sed
ego ipse κεκέπφωμαι. Itaque posthac. Tu tamen vide, quid de adventu meo
censeas, et τὰ ὅλα, cras si perspici potuerint, mane statim ut sciam.

Footnote 166:

  summa _inserted by Schmidt_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 191


                                   XL

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 7 or 8_, B.C. _45_]

Is that so? Does Brutus really say Caesar is going over to the right
party? That is good news. But where will he find them, unless, perhaps,
he hangs himself? But how foolish it is of Brutus! Where, then, does
that masterpiece of yours, which I saw in the Parthenon, the tree of
Brutus' family from Ahala and Brutus, come in?[167] But what can he do?
It is excellent to hear that not even the man who began the whole
criminal business has a good word to say for young Quintus. Indeed, I
was beginning to be afraid that even Brutus was fond of him; for in his
letter to me he said, "But I wish you could have had a taste of his
tales." But when we meet, as you say.

Footnote 167:

  The "Parthenon" was probably the name of the library in Brutus' house.
  According to Nepos (_Att._ 18), Atticus compiled a pedigree of the
  Junian family from its origin for Brutus.

However, what do you advise? Shall I fly to meet him or stay where I am?
For my part I am glued to my books, and I don't want to receive him
here. I hear his father has gone to-day to Saxa Rubra[168] to meet him
in a fury. He was so extraordinarily enraged against him that I
remonstrated with him. But I am capable of acting the "giddy goat" too.
So it rests with the future. Do you please see what you think about my
movements and everything else. If you can see the way to-morrow, let me
know early.

Footnote 168:

  About ten miles from Rome on the Via Flaminia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 192


                                  XLI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VI aut V Id. Sext. a. 709_]

Ego vero Quinto epistulam ad sororem misi. Cum ille quereretur filio cum
matre bellum et se ob eam causam domo cessurum filio diceret, dixi illum
commodas ad matrem litteras, ad te nullas. Ille alterum mirabatur, de te
autem suam culpam, quod saepe graviter ad filium scripsisset de tua in
illum iniuria. Quod autem relanguisse se dicit, ego ei tuis litteris
lectis σκολιαῖς ἀπάταις significavi me non fore iratum.[169] Tum enim
mentio Canae. Omnino, si id consilium placeret, esset necesse; sed, ut
scribis, ratio est habenda gravitatis, et utriusque nostrum idem
consilium esse debet, etsi in me graviores iniuriae et certe notiores.
Si vero etiam Brutus aliquid adferet, nulla dubitatio est. Sed coram.
Magna enim res et multae cautionis. Cras igitur, nisi quid a te
commeatus.

Footnote 169:

  iratum _inserted by Lambinus_.


                                  XLII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano ex. m. Dec. a. 709_]

Venit ille ad me καὶ μάλα κατηφής. Et ego: "Σὺ δὲ δὴ τί σύννους;"
"Rogas?" inquit, "cui iter instet et iter ad bellum idque cum
periculosum tum etiam

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 193


                                  XLI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 8 or 9_, B.C. _45_]

I sent Quintus your letter for your sister. When he complained that his
son was at daggers drawn with his mother and said he should give up the
house to his son on that account, I said young Quintus had sent an
amiable letter to his mother and none to you. He was surprised at the
first, but said it was his fault about you, as he had often written in
anger to his son about your unfairness to him. However, he said his
anger had abated, so I read your letter, and "by crooked ways" hinted
that I should not bear malice. For then he began to mention Cana.[170]
To be sure, if that plan found favour, we should have to make it up;
but, as you say, we must consider our dignity, and we ought to concert
our plans together, though his attacks on me were the worst and
certainly the most public. If Brutus, too, should come to our aid, we
need not hesitate. But we must discuss it together; for it is an
important matter and requires great caution. So to-morrow, unless you
give me furlough.

Footnote 170:

  Daughter of Q. Gellius Canus. Negotiations for her marriage with young
  Quintus were going on.


                                  XLII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Dec._ B.C. _45_]

Young Quintus has come to me very down in the mouth. So I asked, why he
had the blues. "Need you ask," said he, "when I have a journey before
me, a journey to a war, and one that is both

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 194

turpe!" "Quae vis igitur?" inquam. "Aes," inquit, "alienum et tamen ne
viaticum quidem." Hoc loco ego sumpsi quiddam de tua eloquentia; nam
tacui. At ille: "Sed me maxime angit avunculus." "Quidnam?" inquam.
"Quod mihi," inquit, "iratus est." "Cur pateris?" inquam, "malo enim ita
dicere quam cur committis?" "Non patiar," inquit, "causam enim tollam."
Et ego: "Rectissume quidem; sed, si grave non est, velim scire, quid sit
causae." "Quia, dum dubitabam, quam ducerem, non satis faciebam matri;
ita ne illi quidem. Nunc nihil mihi tanti est. Faciam, quod volunt."
"Feliciter velim," inquam, "teque laudo. Sed quando?" "Nihil ad me,"
inquit, "de tempore, quoniam rem probo." "At ego," inquam, "censeo,
priusquam proficiscaris. Ita patri quoque morem gesseris." "Faciam,"
inquit, "ut censes." Hic dialogus sic conclusus est.

Sed heus tu, diem meum scis esse III Nonas Ianuarias; aderis igitur.
Scripseram iam: ecce tibi orat Lepidus, ut veniam. Opinor augures velle
habere ad templum effandum. Eatur; μὴ σκόρδου.[171] Videbimus te igitur.

Footnote 171:

  μὴ σκόρδου _Tyrrell_: ΜΙΑΣΚΟΡΔΟΥ _M_: μίασμα δρύος _Gronovius_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 195

dangerous and even disgraceful." "What is there to compel you then?" I
said. "Debt," said he, "and yet not enough money for the journey." At
that point I borrowed something from your style of eloquence: I held my
tongue. Well, he went on, "But what worries me most is my uncle." "Why?"
said I. "Because he is angry with me," he answered. "Why do you let him
be so?" I said, "for I would rather put it that way than say, Why do you
make him angry?" "I will not let him," he said, "for I will remove the
reason." I replied, "Very right of you, too; but, if it is not a serious
matter, I should like to know what the reason is." "Because my
hesitation which wife I should take annoyed my mother, and consequently
him, too. Now nothing is worth that, and I will do anything they like."
"I hope you will have luck," I said, "and I approve of your resolution.
But when are you going to do it?" "The time doesn't matter to me," said
he, "since I have made up my mind to it." "Well, I think you ought to do
it before you go," I said. "You would oblige your father, too, by doing
so." "I will do as you advise," he said; and there the conversation
ended.

But, look here, you know it is my birthday on the 3rd of January. So you
must come. I was just writing, and here is a request from Lepidus for me
to come to town. I suppose the augurs want me for consecrating a temple.
I must go; anything for a quiet life.[172] So you will see me.

Footnote 172:

  Tyrrell explains this as an allusion to the proverb ἵνα μὴ σκόροδα
  μηδὲ κυάμους (φάγω) (that I may not eat garlic or beans), which was
  applied to persons wishing for a quiet life.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 196


                                 XLIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano prid. Id. Quint. a. 709_]

Ego vero utar prorogatione diei, tuque humanissime fecisti, qui me
certiorem feceris, atque ita, ut eo tempore acciperem litteras, quo non
exspectarem, tuque ut ab ludis scriberes. Sunt omnino mihi quaedam
agenda Romae, sed consequemur biduo post.


                                  XLIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano XIII aut XII K. Sext. a. 709_]

O suavis tuas litteras! (etsi acerba pompa. Verum tamen scire omnia non
acerbum est, vel de Cotta) populum vero praeclarum, quod propter malum
vicinum ne Victoriae quidem ploditur! Brutus apud me fuit; cui quidem
valde placebat me aliquid ad Caesarem. Adnueram; sed pompa deterret. Tu
tamen ausus es Varroni dare! Exspecto, quid iudicet. Quando autem
pelleget? De Attica probo. Est quiddam etiam animum levari cum
spectatione tum etiam religionis opinione et fama. Cottam mi velim
mittas; Libonem mecum habeo et habueram ante Cascam. Brutus mihi T.
Ligari verbis nuntiavit, quod appelletur L. Corfidius in oratione
Ligariana, erratum esse meum. Sed, ut aiunt, μνημονικὸν ἁμάρτημα.
Sciebam Corfidium pernecessarium Ligariorum;

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 197


                                 XLIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July 14_, B.C. _45_]

Yes, I will take advantage of the postponement of the day of sale; and
it was very kind of you to inform me of it, especially to let me have a
letter, when I did not expect one, and to write it at the games. There
are, to be sure, some things I have to do at Rome; but I will attend to
them two days later.


                                  XLIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, July 20 or 21_, B.C. _45_]

What a delightful letter yours was! Though the procession[173] was
unpleasant news; still it is not unpleasant to know everything, even
about Cotta.[174] The people were splendid not even to clap Victory
because of her bad neighbour. Brutus was staying with me and highly
approved of my writing something to Caesar. I assented; but the
procession puts me off. Have you really dared to send my book to Varro!
I am eager for his opinion. But when will he finish reading it? I agree
about Attica. It is something that the spirits are relieved by the
spectacle and by the general feeling of religious associations. I wish
you would send me Cotta; I have Libo and before that I had Casca. Brutus
brought me a message from T. Ligarius that the mention of L. Corfidius
in my speech for Ligarius is a mistake. But it is a _lapsus memoriae_,
as they say. I knew that Corfidius was extremely

Footnote 173:

  A procession at the Ludi Circenses, in which Caesar's image was
  carried among the gods, next to Victory.

Footnote 174:

  Cotta had suggested that Caesar should adopt the title of king,
  stating that the Sibylline books said Parthia could only be conquered
  by a king.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 198

sed eum video ante esse mortuum. Da igitur, quaeso, negotium Pharnaci,
Antaeo, Salvio, ut id nomen ex omnibus libris tollatur.


                                  XLV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano III Id. Sext. a. 709_]

Fuit apud me Lamia post discessum tuum epistulamque ad me attulit missam
sibi a Caesare. Quae quamquam ante data erat quam illae Diocharinae,
tamen plane declarabat illum ante ludos Romanos esse venturum. In qua
extrema scriptum erat, ut ad ludos omnia pararet, neve committeret, ut
frustra ipse properasset. Prorsus ex his litteris non videbatur esse
dubium, quin ante eam diem venturus esset, itemque Balbo, cum eam
epistulam legisset, videri Lamia dicebat.

Dies feriarum mihi additos video, sed quam multos, fac, si me amas,
sciam. De Baebio poteris et de altero vicino Egnatio.

Quod me hortaris, ut eos dies consumam in philosophia explicanda,
currentem tu quidem; sed cum Dolabella vivendum esse istis diebus vides.
Quodnisi me Torquati causa teneret, satis erat dierum, ut Puteolos
excurrere possem et ad tempus redire. Lamia quidem a Balbo, ut
videbatur, audiverat multos nummos domi esse numeratos, quos oporteret
quam primum dividi, magnum pondus argenti; auctionem praeter praedia
primo quoque tempore fieri oportere. Scribas ad me velim, quid tibi
placeat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 199

friendly with the Ligarii; but I see he was dead before the trial. So
please get Pharnaces, Antaeus and Salvius to erase the name from all
copies.


                                  XLV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 11_, B.C. _45_]

Lamia was with me after you left, and brought me a letter Caesar had
sent to him. Though it was despatched earlier than those of Diochares,
still it asserted plainly that he would come before the Roman
games.[175] At the end he told him to make all preparations for the
games and not let him hurry back for nothing. From this letter there
certainly seemed no doubt that he would come before that date; and Lamia
said that Balbus thought so too, when he read the letter.

Footnote 175:

  September 15-19.

I see I have some additional days' holiday, but please let me know how
many. You can find out from Baebius or your other neighbour Egnatius.

In exhorting me to spend the days in an exposition of philosophy, you
are only spurring a willing horse; but note that I have to spend those
days with Dolabella. Now, if I had not been detained on Torquatus'
business, there would have been time enough to make an excursion to
Puteoli and return in time. Lamia has heard from Balbus, it appears,
that there is a good deal of ready money in the house, which ought to be
divided as soon as possible, and a considerable amount of silver plate,
and that the auction of all but the real property ought to take place at
the earliest opportunity. Please write and tell me what you think. Upon

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 200

Equidem, si ex omnibus esset eligendum, nec diligentiorem nec
officiosiorem nec mehercule nostri studiosiorem facile delegissem
Vestorio; ad quem accuratissimas litteras dedi; quod idem te fecisse
arbitror. Mihi quidem hoc satis videtur. Tu quid dicis? Unum enim
pungit, ne neglegentiores esse videamur. Exspectabo igitur tuas
litteras.


                                  XLVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano prid. Id. Sext. a. 709_]

Pollex quidem, ut dixerat ad Idus Sextiles, ita mihi Lanuvi pridie Idus
praesto fuit, sed plane pollex, non index. Cognosces igitur ex ipso.
Balbum conveni. Lepta enim de sua munerum[176] curatione laborans me ad
eum perduxerat. In eo autem Lanuvino, quod Lepido tradidit. Ex eo hoc
primum: "Paulo ante acceperam eas litteras, in quibus magno opere
confirmat ante ludos Romanos." Legi epistulam. Multa de meo Catone, quo
saepissime legendo se dicit copiosiorem factum, Bruti Catone lecto se
sibi visum disertum. Ex eo cognovi cretionem Cluvi (o Vestorium
neglegentem!) liberam cretionem testibus praesentibus sexaginta diebus.
Metuebam, ne ille arcessendus esset. Nunc mittendum est, ut meo

Footnote 176:

  munerum _Schmidt_, _coll. Fam._ vi. 19. 2: viin _M_: vini _vulg._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 201

my word, if I had had the whole world to select from, I could hardly
have chosen a man more painstaking, more obliging, nor, I am sure, more
devoted to my interests than Vestorius. I have sent him an extremely
carefully worded letter; and I think you have done the same. I think
that is sufficient. What do you say? The one thing that bothers me is
that we may seem too careless. So I will wait for your letter.


                                  XLVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 12_, B.C. _45_]

Pollex, having arranged to meet me on the 13th of August, has done so at
Lanuvium on the 12th: but he is a mere thumb, and not a pointing
finger.[177] So you must get your news from him himself. I have met
Balbus: for Lepta, being anxious about the contract for the shows, took
me to him. Well, he was in the place at Lanuvium, which he made over to
Lepidus: and the first thing he said to me was, "I have just had a
letter in which Caesar definitely asserts that he will be here before
the Roman games." I read the letter. It dilated on my _Cato_, and he
said that by reading it frequently he had increased his flow of
language, and, when he read Brutus' _Cato_, he began to think himself
eloquent. I learned from him that the formal acceptance of Cluvius'
legacy was an unconditional acceptance within sixty days before
witnesses. How careless of Vestorius not to tell me! I was afraid I
should have to send for him: but now I must

Footnote 177:

  In the Latin there is a play on the proper name, which I am unable to
  reproduce in English.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 202

iussu cernat. Idem igitur Pollex. Etiam de hortis Cluvianis egi cum
Balbo. Nil liberalius. Se enim statim ad Caesarem scripturum, Cluvium
autem a T. Hordeonio legare et Terentiae HS IↃↃↃ et sepulcro multisque
rebus, nihil a nobis. Subaccusa, quaeso, Vestorium. Quid minus probandum
quam Plotium unguentarium per suos pueros omnia tanto ante Balbo, illum
mi ne per meos quidem? De Cossinio doleo; dilexi hominem.

Quinto delegabo, si quid aeri meo alieno superabit et emptionibus, ex
quibus mi etiam aes alienum faciendum puto. De domo Arpini nil scio.

Vestorium nil est quod accuses. Iam enim obsignata hac epistula noctu
tabellarius noster venit, et ab eo litteras diligenter scriptas attulit
et exemplum testamenti.


                                 XLVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano Id. Sext. a. 709_]

"Posteaquam abs te, Agamemno," non "ut venirem" (nam id quoque fecissem,
nisi Torquatus esset), sed ut scriberem, "tetigit aures nuntius,
extemplo" instituta omisi; ea, quae in manibus habebam, abieci, quod
iusseras, edolavi. Tu velim e Pollice cognoscas

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 203

commission him to accept at my orders. So this same Pollex can take the
message. I discussed Cluvius' gardens with Balbus too, and he was most
obliging. For he said he would write to Caesar at once, but that Cluvius
had subtracted from Hordeonius' legacy some £500[178] for Terentia, the
cost of his tomb and a lot of other things, but nothing from my share.
Please remonstrate with Vestorius. It is surely most out of place for
Plotius the perfumer to send his own special messengers with full
particulars to Balbus so long in advance, while Vestorius does not send
me news even by my messengers. I am sorry about Cossinius; I was fond of
him.

Footnote 178:

  50,000 sesterces.

I will make over to Quintus anything that may be left after paying my
debts and making purchases, for which I am afraid I shall incur more
debt. About the house at Arpinum I know nothing.

There is no necessity to grumble at Vestorius, for to-night, after I had
sealed this letter, my messenger came bringing a letter full of details
and a copy of the will.


                                 XLVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 13_, B.C. _45_]

"When from thee, Agamemnon, the message reached my ears," not "that I
should come" (though I should have done that too, if it had not been for
Torquatus), "straightway" I gave up what I had begun, threw down what I
had in hand and made a rough sketch of what you ordered.[179] I should
like you to find out from

Footnote 179:

  _i.e._ he gave up working at the _De Natura Deorum_, and set about
  writing a letter to Caesar.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 204

rationes nostras sumptuarias. Turpe est enim nobis illum, qualiscumque
est, hoc primo anno egere. Post moderabimur diligentius. Idem Pollex
remittendus est, ut ille cernat. Plane Puteolos non fuit eundum, cum ob
ea, quae ad te scripsi, tum quod Caesar adest. Dolabella scribit se ad
me postridie Idus. O magistrum molestum!


                                 XLVIIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae III K. Sext. a. 709_]

Lepidus ad me heri vesperi litteras misit Antio. Nam ibi erat. Habet
enim domum, quam nos vendidimus. Rogat magno opere, ut sim Kal. in
senatu; me et sibi et Caesari vehementer gratum esse facturum. Puto
equidem nihil esse. Dixisset enim tibi fortasse aliquid Oppius, quoniam
Balbus est aeger. Sed tamen malui venire frustra quam desiderari, si
opus esset. Moleste ferrem postea. Itaque hodie Anti, cras ante meridiem
domi. Tu velim, nisi te impedivisti, apud nos pr. Kal. cum Pilia.

Te spero cum Publilio confecisse. Equidem Kal. in Tusculanum recurram;
me enim absente omnia cum illis transigi malo. Quinti fratris epistulam
ad te misi, non satis humane illam quidem respondentem meis litteris,
sed tamen quod tibi satis sit, ut equidem existimo. Tu videbis.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 205

Pollex the state of my exchequer. It would be a disgrace to me that my
son should run short of money in his first year, whatever he may
deserve. Afterwards we will restrict him more carefully. Pollex also
must be sent back, that Vestorius may accept the inheritance. Clearly I
ought not to have gone to Puteoli, both on account of what you say, and
because Caesar is getting near. Dolabella tells me he is coming to me on
the 14th. What a tiresome school-master!


                                 XLVIIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, July 30_, B.C. _45_]

Yesterday evening I had a letter from Lepidus at Antium. That is where
he is, for he has the house I sold. He implores me to be in the Senate
on the 1st, saying that both he and Caesar would take it as a great
favour. I don't think it is of any importance; for Oppius would probably
have said something to you, as Balbus is ill. However I would rather
come for nothing, if necessary, than have my absence noticed. I should
regret it afterwards. So to-day I go to Antium, to-morrow home by
midday. I should like you and Pilia to come to dinner on the last of the
month, if you are not engaged.

I hope you have settled with Publilius. I shall rush back to Tusculum on
the 1st; for I prefer all the transactions with them to take place in my
absence. I am sending my brother's letter to you: it is not a very kind
answer to mine, but I think it should satisfy you. You will see for
yourself.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 206


                                 XLVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV Non. Sext. a. 709_]

Heri nescio quid in strepitu videor exaudisse, cum diceres te in
Tusculanum venturum. Quod utinam! iterum utinam! tuo tamen commodo.

Lepta me rogat, ut, si quid sibi opus sit, accurram; mortuus enim
Babullius. Caesar, opinor, ex uncia, etsi nihil adhuc; sed Lepta ex
triente. Veretur autem, ne non liceat tenere hereditatem, ἀλόγως omnino,
sed veretur tamen. Is igitur si accierit, accurram; si minus, non
antequam necesse erit. Tu Pollicem, cum poteris.

Laudationem Porciae tibi misi correctam. Adeo properavi, ut, si forte
aut Domitio filio aut Bruto mitteretur, haec mitteretur. Id, si tibi
erit commodum, magno opere cures velim et velim M. Varronis et Olli
mittas laudationem, Olli utique. Nam illam legi, volo tamen regustare.
Quaedam enim vix mihi credo legisse me.


                                  XLIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano circ. XI K. Sept. a. 709_]

Atticae primum salutem (quam equidem ruri esse arbitror; multam igitur
salutem) et Piliae. De Tigellio, si quid novi. Qui quidem, ut mihi
Gallus Fadius scripsit, μέμψιν ἀναφέρει mihi quandam iniquissimam, me
Phameae defuisse, cum eius causam recepissem.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 207


                                 XLVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 2_, B.C. _45_]

Yesterday in the midst of all the noise I think I caught some remark of
yours about coming to Tusculum. I wish you would. I wish to goodness you
would: but at your convenience.

Lepta asks me to go to him, if there is any necessity: for Babullius is
dead. Caesar, I fancy, is heir to one-twelfth of his estate—though I
know nothing yet: but Lepta to a third. He is afraid he may not be
allowed to take the inheritance. It is absurd of course, but still he is
afraid. So, if he sends for me, I shall go at once: if not, not till it
is necessary. Send back Pollex, when you can.

I am sending you the funeral oration of Porcia corrected. I have hurried
about it, so that, if it should be sent to young Domitius or to Brutus,
this edition should be sent. If it is convenient, I should much like you
to see about it, and please send me the orations of M. Varro, and
Ollius, at any rate that of Ollius. I have read it, but I want to dip
into it again: for there are things in it that I can hardly believe I
read.


                                  XLIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, circa Aug. 22_, B.C. _45_]

First health to Attica (who I suppose is now in the country, so I wish
her a full return to health) and to Pilia too. Let me know about
Tigellius, if there is any news. According to a letter of Fadius Gallus,
he is very down on me most unjustly for deserting Phamea, when I had
undertaken his

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 208

Quam quidem receperam contra pueros Octavios Cn. filios non libenter;
sed Phameae causa volebam. Erat enim, si meministi, in consulatus
petitione per te mihi pollicitus, si quid opus esset; quod ego perinde
tuebar, ac si usus essem. Is ad me venit dixitque iudicem operam dare
sibi constituisse eo die ipso, quo de Sestio nostro lege Pompeia in
consilium iri necesse erat. Scis enim dies illorum iudiciorum
praestitutos fuisse. Respondi non ignorare eum, quid ego deberem Sestio.
Quem vellet alium diem si sumpsisset, me ei non defuturum. Ita tum ille
discessit iratus. Puto me tibi narrasse. Non laboravi scilicet nec
hominis alieni iniustissimam iracundiam mihi curandam putavi. Gallo
autem narravi, cum proxime Romae fui, quid audissem, neque nominavi
Balbum minorem. Habuit suum negotium Gallus, ut scribit. Ait illum me
animi conscientia, quod Phameam destituissem, de se suspicari. Quare
tibi hactenus mando, de illo nostro, si quid poteris, exquiras, de me ne
quid labores. Est bellum aliquem libenter odisse et, quem ad modum non
omnibus dormire, ita[180] non omnibus servire. Etsi mehercule, ut tu
intellegis, magis mihi isti serviunt, si observare servire est.

Footnote 180:

  non omnibus dormire, ita _added by Lambinus_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 209

case. It went against the grain with me to take it at all against the
sons of Cn. Octavius; but for Phamea's sake I agreed.[181] For, if you
remember, when I was standing for the consulship, he sent a promise of
any assistance he could render through you; and I appreciated it as much
as if I had used it. He came to me and said the judge had undertaken to
hear his case on the very same day that the jury were bound by the
Pompeian law to settle that of our friend Sestius. For you know the days
of those cases have been fixed by law. I answered that he could not but
be aware of my obligations to Sestius. If he would choose any other day,
I would not fail him. So then he left me in a temper. I think I told you
about it. I did not bother myself about it of course, not thinking that
a perfectly unwarrantable fit of anger of a stranger concerned me.
However I told Gallus the next time I was in town what I had heard,
without mentioning young Balbus. Gallus took the matter up, as he tells
me. He says Tigellius asserts that I suspect him because of my bad
conscience about my desertion of Phamea. Accordingly I commission you to
find out what you can from young Balbus, but not to bother your head
about me. It is quite a good thing to have somebody to hate with a will,
and not to pander to everybody any more than to be asleep for
everybody.[182] Though upon my word, as you know, Caesar's party are
obsequious to me more than I to them, if attention is obsequiousness.

Footnote 181:

  Or "I did also wish well to Phamea," as Shuckburgh.

Footnote 182:

  In a letter of about the same date to Gallus (_Ad Fam._ VII. 24)
  Cicero says, _Cipius, opinor, olim "non omnibus dormio"; sic ego non
  omnibus, mi Galle, servio_. It is explained that Cipius used to shut
  his eyes to his wife's barefaced amours in his presence; but when a
  servant, thinking him asleep, stole a cup before his eyes, he woke up
  with this remark.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 210


                                   L

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano circ. IX K. Sept. a. 709_]

Admonitus quibusdam tuis litteris, ut ad Caesarem uberiores litteras
mittere instituerem, cum mihi Balbus nuper in Lanuvino dixisset se et
Oppium scripsisse ad Caesarem me legisse libros contra Catonem et
vehementer probasse, conscripsi de iis ipsis libris epistulam Caesari,
quae deferretur ad Dolabellam; sed eius exemplum misi ad Oppium et
Balbum, scripsique ad eos, ut tum deferri ad Dolabellam iuberent meas
litteras, si ipsi exemplum probassent. Ita mihi rescripserunt, nihil
umquam se legisse melius, epistulamque meam iusserunt dari Dolabellae.

Vestorius ad me scripsit, ut iuberem mancipio dari servo suo pro mea
parte Hetereio cuidam fundum Brinnianum, ut ipse ei Puteolis recte
mancipio dare posset. Eum servum, si tibi videbitur, ad me mittes;
opinor enim ad te etiam scripsisse Vestorium.

De adventu Caesaris idem quod a te mihi scriptum est ab Oppio et Balbo.
Miror te nihildum cum Tigellio. Velut hoc ipsum, quantum acceperit,
prorsus aveo scire, nec tamen flocci facio. Quaeris, quid cogitem de
obviam itione. Quid censes nisi Alsium? Et quidem ad Murenam de hospitio
scripseram, sed opinor cum Matio profectum. Sallustius igitur urgebitur.

Scripto iam superiore versiculo Eros mihi dixit sibi Murenam
liberalissime respondisse. Eo igitur utamur. Nam Silius culcitas non
habet. Dida autem, opinor, hospitibus totam villam concessit.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 211


                                   L

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, circa Aug. 24_, B.C. _45_]

You suggested in one of your letters that I should set about composing a
longer letter to send to Caesar, and Balbus told me lately at Lanuvium
that he and Oppius had written to Caesar telling him I had read his
books against Cato and strongly approved of them: so I wrote a letter to
Caesar about those books to be sent to Dolabella. But I sent a copy to
Oppius and Balbus, asking them to send on my letter to Dolabella, if
they themselves approved of the copy. So they have answered that they
never read anything better and have had my letter forwarded to
Dolabella.

Vestorius has written asking me to make over my share in the property of
Brinnius to a slave of his on behalf of one Hetereius, so that he can
complete the transfer at Puteoli according to law. If you think it
right, send the slave to me; for I suppose Vestorius has written to you
too.

About Caesar's coming Oppius and Balbus tell me the same as you. I am
surprised that you have not yet had a talk with Tigellius. For instance,
I should much like to know just how much he got; however I don't really
care a straw. You ask what I think about going to meet Caesar. Where are
you thinking of, unless it is Alsium? Indeed I have written to Murena
asking him to take me in; but I suppose he has gone with Matius. So I
shall inflict myself on Sallustius.

When I had written the last line, Eros told me Murena gave him the
kindest of answers: so let me make use of him. For Silius has no
cushions, while Dida, I believe, has given up his whole villa to guests.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 212


                                   LI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VII K. Sept. a. 709_]

Ad Caesarem quam misi epistulam, eius exemplum fugit me tum tibi
mittere. Nec id fuit, quod suspicaris, ut me puderet tui, ne ridicule
Μίκυλλος,[183] nec mehercule scripsi aliter, ac si πρὸς ἴσον ὅμοιόν que
scriberem. Bene enim existimo de illis libris, ut tibi coram. Itaque
scripsi et ἀκολακεύτως et tamen sic, ut nihil eum existimem lecturum
libentius.

Footnote 183:

  Μίκυλλος _Schmidt, comparing Lucian Gall. I, Tyrann._ 14: micillus
  _MSS._

De Attica nunc demum mihi est exploratum; itaque ei de integro
gratulare. Tigellium totum mihi, et quidem quam primum; nam pendeo
animi. Narrabo tibi, Quintus cras; sed, ad me an ad te, nescio. Mi
scripsit Romam VIII Kal. Sed misi, qui invitaret. Etsi hercle iam Romam
veniendum est, ne ille ante advolet.


                                  LII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano XII K. Ian. a. 709_]

O hospitem mihi tam gravem ἀμεταμέλητον! Fuit enim periucunde. Sed, cum
secundis Saturnalibus ad Philippum vesperi venisset, villa ita completa
a militibus est, ut vix triclinium, ubi cenaturus ipse Caesar esset,
vacaret, quippe hominum CIↃ CIↃ. Sane sum commotus, quid futurum esset
postridie; ac mihi Barba Cassius subvenit, custodes dedit. Castra in

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 213


                                   LI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, Aug. 26_, B.C. _45_]

It escaped my memory to send you a copy of the letter I sent to Caesar
at the time. It was not, as you suspect, that I was ashamed of showing
it to you, for fear I should seem too much of a flatterer; nor, I assure
you, did I write otherwise than I should to an equal. For I have got a
high opinion of those books of his, as I told you when we met. So I
wrote without flattery, and yet I think he will read it with great
pleasure.

At last I have full news of Attica; so please congratulate her again.
Tell me all about Tigellius and that too as soon as possible; for I am
feeling anxious. There is one thing I must mention. Young Quintus is
coming to-morrow; but, whether to me or to you, I don't know. He wrote
to me he was coming to Rome on the 25th. I have sent someone to invite
him here. Though to be sure I must go to Rome now, for fear Caesar may
forestall me.


                                  LII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, Dec. 21_, B.C. _45_]

To think that my formidable guest leaves no regret behind! For indeed it
passed off splendidly. However, when he reached Philippus on the evening
of the 18th, the house was so full of soldiers that there was hardly a
room left for Caesar himself to dine in. Two thousand men if you please!
I was much disturbed as to what was going to happen the next day; and
Cassius Barba came to the rescue and gave me guards. A camp was pitched
in the fields,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 214

agro, villa defensa est. Ille tertiis Saturnalibus apud Philippum ad h.
VII nec quemquam admisit; rationes, opinor, cum Balbo. Inde ambulavit in
litore. Post h. VIII in balneum. Tum audivit de Mamurra, vultum non
mutavit. Unctus est, accubuit. Ἐμετικὴν agebat. Itaque et edit et bibit
ἀδεῶς et iucunde, opipare sane et apparate nec id solum, sed

                                        "bene cocto et
            condito sermone bono et, si quaeris, libenter."

Praeterea tribus tricliniis accepti οἱ περὶ αὐτὸν valde copiose.
Libertis minus lautis servisque nihil defuit. Nam lautiores eleganter
accepi. Quid multa? homines visi sumus. Hospes tamen non is, cui
diceres: "Amabo te, eodem ad me, cum revertere." Semel satis est.
Σπουδαῖον οὐδὲν in sermone, φιλόλογα multa. Quid quaeris? delectatus est
et libenter fuit. Puteolis se aiebat unum diem fore, alterum ad Baias.

Habes hospitium sive ἐπισταθμείαν odiosam mihi, dixi, non molestam. Ego
paulisper hic, deinde in Tusculanum. Dolabellae villam cum praeteriret,
omnis armatorum copia dextra, sinistra ad equum nec usquam alibi. Hoc ex
Nicia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 215

and the house put under guard. On the 19th he stayed with Philippus till
one o'clock and admitted no one: at his accounts, I believe, with
Balbus. Then he walked on the shore. After two he took his bath. Then he
heard about Mamurra without changing countenance. He was anointed and
sat down to dinner. He was undergoing a course of emetics, so he ate and
drank at his pleasure without fear. It was a lordly dinner and
well-served, and not only that, but

          "Well cooked, and seasoned, and, the truth to tell,
          With pleasant discourse all went very well."[184]

Footnote 184:

  A quotation from Lucilius.

Besides his chosen circle were entertained very liberally in three
rooms: and freedmen of lower degree and slaves could not complain of
stint. The upper sort were entertained in style. In fact, I was
somebody.[185] Still he was not the sort of guest to whom one would say:
"Be sure to look me up on the way back." Once is enough. There was no
serious talk, but plenty of literary. In a word he was pleased and
enjoyed himself. He said he would spend one day at Puteoli and another
near Baiae.

Footnote 185:

  Or, as Tyrrell suggests, "we were quite friendly together," _i.e._
  Caesar did not "assume the god"; or possibly even "we all felt we were
  in civilised society."

There you have all about my entertainment, or billeting you might say,
objectionable, as I have said, but not uncomfortable. I am staying here
a while and then go to Tusculum. As he passed Dolabella's house and
nowhere else the whole troop formed up on the right and left of him. So
Nicias tells me.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 216




                           M. TULLI CICERONIS
                         EPISTULARUM AD ATTICUM
                         LIBER QUARTUS DECIMUS


                                   I

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in suburbano Mati VII Id. Apr. a. 710_]

Deverti ad illum, de quo tecum mane. Nihil perditius; explicari rem non
posse. "Etenim, si ille tali ingenio exitum non reperiebat, quis nunc
reperiet?" Quid quaeris? perisse omnia aiebat (quod haud scio an ita
sit; verum ille gaudens) adfirmabatque minus diebus XX tumultum
Gallicum. In sermonem se post Idus Martias praeterquam Lepido venisse
nemini. Ad summam non posse istaec sic abire. O prudentem Oppium! qui
nihilo minus illum desiderat, sed loquitur nihil; quod quemquam bonum
offendat. Sed haec hactenus.

Tu, quaeso, quicquid novi (multa autem exspecto), scribere ne pigrere,
in his, de Sexto satisne certum, maxime autem de Bruto nostro. De quo
quidem ille, ad quem deverti, Caesarem solitum dicere: "Magni refert,
hic quid velit, sed, quicquid volt, valde volt"; idque eum
animadvertisse, cum pro Deiotaro Nicaeae dixerit; valde vehementer eum
visum et libere dicere;

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 217




                            CICERO'S LETTERS
                               TO ATTICUS
                                BOOK XIV


                                   I

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _At Matius' villa, April 7_, B.C. _44_]

I have stopped for a visit with the man we were speaking of in the
morning.[186] His view is that nothing could be more disgraceful and the
thing was quite hopeless. "For, if Caesar with his genius could not find
a solution, who will find it now?" In a word he said the end had come
(which may be true, but he was pleased about it), and assured me that in
less than twenty days there would be a rising in Gaul. He has not
discussed the matter with anyone except Lepidus since the 15th of March:
and, in fine, things cannot pass off like this. What a wise man is
Oppius! He regrets Caesar quite as much, but says nothing that can
offend any of the loyal party. So much for that.

Footnote 186:

  C. Matius Calvena.

Pray do not delay in sending me any news—and I expect there is plenty:
among other things whether we may be sure of Sextus, but especially
about our friend Brutus. About him the man I am staying with says Caesar
used to say: "What he wants is of great importance, but whatever he
wants, he wants it badly"; and that he noticed it, when he pleaded for
Deiotarus at Nicaea, for he seemed to speak with emphasis and with
boldness. Again—I like to write

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 218

atque etiam (ut enim quicque succurrit, libet scribere) proxime, cum
Sesti rogatu apud eum fuissem exspectaremque sedens, quoad vocarer,
dixisse eum: "Ego dubitem, quin summo in odio sim, cum M. Cicero sedeat
nec suo commodo me convenire possit? Atqui, si quisquam est facilis, hic
est. Tamen non dubito, quin me male oderit." Haec et eius modi multa.
Sed ad propositum. Quicquid erit non modo magnum, sed etiam parvum,
scribes. Equidem nihil intermittam.


                                   II

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in suburbano Mati VI Id. Apr. a. 710_]

Duas a te accepi epistulas heri. Ex priore theatrum Publiliumque
cognovi, bona signa consentientis multitudinis. Plausus vero L. Cassio
datus etiam facetus mihi quidem visus est. Altera epistula de Madaro
scripta, apud quem nullum φαλάκρωμα, ut putas. Processit enim, sed
minus. Diutius sermone eius sum retentus. Quod autem ad te scripseram
obscure fortasse, id eius modi est. Aiebat Caesarem secum, quo tempore
Sesti rogatu veni ad eum, cum exspectarem sedens, dixisse: "Ego nunc tam
sim stultus, ut hunc ipsum facilem hominem putem mihi esse amicum, cum
tam diu sedens meum commodum exspectet?" Habes igitur φαλάκρωμα
inimicissimum otii, id est Bruti.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 219

the first thing that comes into my head—recently, when at Sestius'
request I paid Caesar a visit and was sitting waiting to be called in,
he remarked: "Can I doubt that I am heartily detested, when Cicero sits
waiting and cannot visit me at his convenience? Yet, if ever there was a
good-natured man, he is one. However, I have no doubt that he detests
me." That and more to the same effect. But to return to the point. Write
me anything there is to write, not only important matters, but even
petty details. I shall not let anything escape me.


                                   II

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _From Matius' villa, April 8_, B.C. _44_]

I had two letters from you yesterday. From the first I learned about the
theatre and Publilius,[187] good signs of the unanimous feeling of the
people. The applause given to Cassius I thought even overdone. The other
letter was about Bald-pate,[188] though he is not so bald as you think.
For he has advanced, though not very far. I have been detained too long
by his talk. What I mentioned to you, perhaps a little obscurely, was
like this. He said Caesar remarked to him, when I went to see him at
Sestius' request and was sitting waiting: "Can I be foolish enough to
think that this man, good-natured though he is, is friendly to me, when
he has to sit and wait for my convenience so long." So you have in
Bald-pate a bitter enemy of peace, that is to say, of Brutus.

Footnote 187:

  _i.e._ the production of a mime by Publilius Syra.

Footnote 188:

  _Madaro_ = μαδαρῷ, "bald-pate," a pun on Calvena, Matius' _agnomen_.
  The reading and rendering of the rest of the sentence is doubtful.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 220

In Tusculanum hodie, Lanuvi cras, inde Asturae cogitabam. Piliae paratum
est hospitium, sed vellem Atticam. Verum tibi ignosco. Quarum utrique
salutem.


                                  III

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano V Id. Apr. a. 710_]

Tranquillae tuae quidem litterae. Quod utinam diutius! nam Matius posse
negabat. Ecce autem structores nostri ad frumentum profecti, cum inanes
redissent, rumorem adferunt magnum Romae domum ad Antonium frumentum
omne portari. Πανικὸν certe; scripsisses enim. Corumbus Balbi nullus
adhuc. Est mihi notum nomen; bellus enim esse dicitur architectus.

Ad obsignandum tu adhibitus non sine causa videris. Volunt enim nos ita
putare; nescio, cur non animo quoque sentiant. Sed quid haec ad nos?
Odorare tamen Antoni διάθεσιν; quem quidem ego epularum magis arbitror
rationem habere quam quicquam mali cogitare.

Tu, si quid pragmaticum habebis, scribes; sin minus, populi ἐπισημασίαν
et mimorum dicta perscribito. Piliae et Atticae salutem.


                                   IV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Lanuvii IV Id. Apr. a. 710_]

Numquid putas me Lanuvi? At ego te istic cotidie aliquid novi suspicor.
Tument negotia. Nam, cum Matius, quid censes ceteros? Equidem doleo,
quod

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 221

I am thinking of going to Tusculum to-day, to Lanuvium to-morrow, and
then to Astura. I am ready to entertain Pilia, though I should like
Attica. However, I forgive you. So greet me to them both.


                                  III

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, April 9_, B.C. _44_]

Your letter is full of peace, and I only hope peace may last some time.
Matius does not think it can. Here are my builders, who had gone off
harvesting, returning empty-handed and bringing a strong report that all
the corn is being taken to Antony's house at Rome. Of course it is a
false alarm, or I should have heard it from you. Not a sign as yet of
Balbus' man Corumbus. I know the name; he is said to be a good
architect.

It appears to me there was reason in their asking you to be present at
the sealing of that will: for they want us to think them friendly, and I
don't see why that should not be their real feeling. But what does it
matter to us? However, scent out Antony's intentions; I fancy he is more
concerned about his banquets than about plotting any harm.

If you have any news of practical importance, let me hear it; if not,
give me full details as to who were cheered by the people at the mimes,
and the epigrams of the actors. My love to Pilia and Attica.


                                   IV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Lanuvium, April 10_, B.C. _44_]

Do you suppose I get any news at Lanuvium? But I suspect you hear
something fresh every day in town. The trouble is coming to a head: for
when Matius thinks so, what do you suppose others think? What

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 222

numquam in ulla civitate accidit, non una cum libertate rem publicam
recuperatam. Horribile est, quae loquantur, quae minitentur. Ac vereor
Gallica etiam bella, ipse Sextus quo evadat. Sed omnia licet concurrant,
Idus Martiae consolantur. Nostri autem ἥρωες, quod per ipsos confici
potuit, gloriosissime et magnificentissime confecerunt; reliquae res
opes et copias desiderant, quas nullas habemus. Haec ego ad te. Tu, si
quid novi (nam cotidie aliquid exspecto), confestim ad me, et, si novi
nihil, nostro more tamen ne patiamur intermitti litterulas. Equidem non
committam.


                                   V

                          CICERO ATTICO S. D.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Asturae III Id. Apr. a. 710_]

Spero tibi iam esse, ut volumus, quoniam quidem ἠσίτησας, cum leviter
commotus esses; sed tamen velim scire, quid agas. Signa bella, quod
Calvena moleste fert se suspectum esse Bruto; illa signa non bona, si
cum signis legiones veniunt e Gallia. Quid tu illas putas, quae fuerunt
in Hispania? nonne idem postulaturas? quid, quas Annius transportavit?
C. Asinium volui, sed μνημονικὸν ἁμάρτημα. Ab aleatore[189] φυρμὸς
πολύς. Nam ista quidem Caesaris libertorum coniuratio facile
opprimeretur, si recta saperet Antonius. O meam stultam verecundiam! qui
legari noluerim ante res prolatas, ne deserere viderer hunc

Footnote 189:

  a balneatore _some MSS. and editors: in which case it refers to the
  Pseudo-Marius_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 223

worries me is what never happened in any other state, that the
constitution has not been recovered when freedom has. It is frightful to
listen to the rumours and the threats: and I am afraid of a war in Gaul
and of what side Sextus will take. But though all the world conspire
against us, the Ides of March console me. Our heroes accomplished most
gloriously and magnificently all that they could accomplish by
themselves; the other matters require money and forces, and we have
neither. That is all I have to say to you. If you have any news (for I
expect something every day), let me know quickly, and, even if there is
no news, don't let us break our custom and not exchange notes. I will
see that I don't.


                                   V

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Astura, April 11_, B.C. _44_]

I hope you are as well as I wish you to be by now, as you were fasting
owing to a slight indisposition: but I should like to know how you are.
It is a good sign that Calvena is annoyed at Brutus' suspicions; but it
will be by no means a good sign if the legions come from Gaul with their
ensigns. What do you think about those that were in Spain? Won't they
make the same demands? And what of those that Annius took across? I
meant to say C. Asinius, but I had a _lapsus memoriae_. A fine mess the
gambler[190] is making. For that conspiracy of Caesar's freedmen might
have been put down easily, if Antony had his wits about him. How foolish
were my scruples in refusing a free legation before the vacation for
fear of appearing to shirk this turmoil. Of course, if I could

Footnote 190:

  Antony.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 224

rerum tumorem; cui certe si possem mederi, desse non deberem. Sed vides
magistratus, si quidem illi magistratus, vides tamen tyranni satellites
in imperiis, vides eiusdem exercitus, vides in latere veteranos, quae
sunt εὐρίπιστα omnia, eos autem, qui orbis terrae custodiis non modo
saepti, verum etiam magni[191] esse debebant, tantum modo laudari atque
amari, sed parietibus contineri. Atque illi quoquo modo beati, civitas
misera. Sed velim scire, qui adventus Octavi, num qui concursus ad eum,
num quae νεωτερισμοῦ suspicio. Non puto equidem, sed tamen, quicquid
est, scire cupio. Haec scripsi ad te proficiscens Astura III Idus.

Footnote 191:

  _For_ magni _Manutius proposed_ vagi, _Orelli_ ἅγιοι, _and Reid_
  muniti.


                                   VI

                          CICERO ATTICO S. D.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Fundis prid. Id. Apr. a. 710_]

Pridie Idus Fundis accepi tuas litteras cenans. Primum igitur melius
esse, deinde meliora te nuntiare. Odiosa illa enim fuerant, legiones
venire. Nam de Octavio susque deque. Exspecto, quid de Mario; quem
quidem ego sublatum rebar a Caesare. Antoni conloquium cum heroibus
nostris pro re nata non incommodum. Sed tamen adhuc me nihil delectat
praeter Idus Martias. Nam, quoniam Fundis sum cum Ligure nostro,
discrucior Sextili fundum a verberone Curtilio possideri. Quod cum dico,
de toto genere dico. Quid enim miserius quam ea nos

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 225

have helped to remedy it, I had no right to fail in my duty. But you see
the magistrates, if they can be called magistrates; you see, in spite of
all, the tyrant's satellites in authority; you see his army, you see his
veterans on our flank. All these can easily be fanned into flame. But
those who ought to be hedged about and even honoured by the watchful
care of the whole world, are only praised and admired—and confined to
their houses. And they, be that as it may, are happy, while the state is
in misery. But I should like to know about Octavius' arrival, whether
there was a rush to meet him and whether there was any suspicion of a
_coup d'état_. I don't suppose there was, but still I should like to
know, whatever happened. I am writing this as I leave Astura on the 11th
of April.


                                   VI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Fundi, April 12_, B.C. _44_]

On the 12th I received your letter at Fundi during dinner. First you are
better, and secondly you send better news. For the news about the coming
of the legions was annoying. That about Octavius is neither here nor
there. I am anxious to hear about Marius. I thought Caesar had got rid
of him. Antony's conversation with our heroes is not unsatisfactory
under the circumstances. However, nothing at present gives me any
pleasure except the Ides of March. For now that I am at Fundi with our
friend Ligur, I am annoyed at an estate of a Sextilius being in the
hands of a knave like Curtilius. In mentioning this instance I am
speaking of a whole class. For can there be a more wretched state of
affairs than

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 226

tueri, propter quae illum oderamus? etiamne consules et tribunes pl. in
biennium, quos ille voluit? Nullo modo reperio, quem ad modum possim
πολιτεύεσθαι. Nihil enim tam σόλοικον quam tyrannoctonos in caelo esse,
tyranni facta defendi. Sed vides consules, vides reliquos magistratus,
si isti magistratus, vides languorem bonorum. Exsultant laetitia in
municipiis. Dici enim non potest, quanto opere gaudeant, ut ad me
concurrant, ut audire cupiant mea verba de re p. Nec ulla interea
decreta. Sic enim πεπολιτεύμεθα, ut victos metueremus.

Haec ad te scripsi apposita secunda mensa; plura et πολιτικώτερα postea,
et tu, quid agas, quidque agatur.


                                  VII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Formiano XVII K. Mai. a. 710_]

Postridie Idus Paulum Caietae vidi. Is mihi de Mario et de re publica
quaedam sane pessima. A te scilicet nihil; nemo enim meorum. Sed Brutum
nostrum audio visum sub Lanuvio. Ubi tandem est futurus? Nam cum reliqua
tum de hoc scire aveo omnia. Ego e Formiano exiens XVII Kal., ut inde
altero die in Puteolanum, scripsi haec.

A Cicerone mihi litterae sane πεπινωμέναι et bene longae. Cetera autem
vel fingi possunt, πίνος litterarum significat doctiorem. Nunc magno
opere a te

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 227

that we should keep up the things for which we detested him? Are we to
have consuls and tribunes, too, for the next two years selected by him?
I don't see how I can possibly take part in politics. For nothing could
be more topsy-turvy than to belaud the slayers of the tyrant to the
skies and to defend the tyrant's acts. But you see the consuls; you see
the other magistrates, if they can be called magistrates; you see the
indifference of the loyalists. In the country towns they are jumping for
joy. I cannot describe their rejoicing, how they flock round me, how
they want to hear what I have to say about the state. And in the
meantime no senatorial decrees. For our policy is this, that we are
afraid of the conquered party.

This I have written during dessert. I will write fuller and more about
politics later, and do you write what you are doing and what is being
done.


                                  VII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Formiae, April 15_, B.C. _44_]

I saw Paulus at Caieta on the 14th. He told me about Marius and gave me
very bad news about the State. From you, of course, I have nothing, as
none of my men have arrived. But I hear our friend Brutus has been seen
near Lanuvium. Where on earth is he going to be? For I want to know
among other things everything about him. I am writing this as I leave
Formiae on the 15th, and I hope to reach Puteoli on the next day.

I have had a letter from my son in quite the best style, and fairly
long. Other things may be put on, but the style of the letter shows that
he is learning something. Now I appeal to you earnestly to see

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 228

peto, de quo sum nuper tecum locutus, ut videas, ne quid ei desit. Id
cum ad officium nostrum pertinet tum ad existimationem et dignitatem;
quod idem intellexi tibi videri. Omnino, si ego, ut volo, mense
Quinctili in Graeciam, sunt omnia faciliora; sed, cum sint ea tempora,
ut certi nihil esse possit, quid honestum mihi sit, quid liceat, quid
expediat, quaeso, da operam, ut illum quam honestissime copiosissimeque
tueamur.

Haec et cetera, quae ad nos pertinebunt, ut soles, cogitabis ad meque
aut, quod ad rem pertineat, aut, si nihil erit, quod in buccam venerit,
scribes.


                                  VIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Sinuessano XVII K. Mai. a. 710_]

Tu me iam rebare, cum scribebas, in actis esse nostris, et ego accepi
XVII Kal. in deversoriolo Sinuessano tuas litteras. De Mario probe, etsi
doleo L. Crassi nepotem. Optime iam etiam Bruto nostro probari Antonium.
Nam, quod Iuniam scribis moderate et amice scriptas litteras attulisse,
mihi Paulus dicit ad se a fratre missas; quibus in extremis erat sibi
insidias fieri; se id certis auctoribus comperisse. Hoc nec mihi
placebat et multo illi minus. Reginae fuga mihi non molesta est. Clodia
quid egerit, scribas ad me velim. De Byzantiis curabis ut cetera et
Pelopem ad te arcesses. Ego, ut postulas, Baiana

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 229

that he wants for nothing: I had already mentioned the point to you. It
is a point that concerns my duty and my reputation and dignity as well;
and I see you take that view yourself. Of course, if I go to Greece, as
I should like, in July, everything will be easier: but, as the times are
such that I cannot be sure what will be honourable, possible, or
expedient for me, I beg you to be careful that we supply him with a
reasonable and liberal income.

As usual you will consider these points and others that concern me, and
will write and tell me the pertinent facts or, if there are none,
whatever comes into your head.


                                  VIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Sinuessa, April 15_, B.C. _44_]

When you wrote, you thought I was already in one of my seaside houses,
and I have received your letter on the 15th in my lodge at Sinuessa. I
am glad about Marius, though I am sorry for the grandson of L.
Crassus.[192] It is a very good thing that Antony is so approved of even
by our friend Brutus. You say Junia brought a letter written in a
moderately friendly tone: Paulus tells me it was sent to him by his
brother,[193] and that at the end of it there was a statement that there
was a plot against him, which he had ascertained on excellent authority.
I was annoyed about that and he was still more annoyed. I see nothing to
object to in Cleopatra's flight. I should like you to tell me what
Clodia has done. You must look after the people of Byzantium like
everything else, and get Pelops[194] to call on you. I

Footnote 192:

  The Pseudo-Marius had just been put to death by Antony.

Footnote 193:

  Both letters came from M. Lepidus, husband of Junia—the one to Brutus,
  the other to L. Aemilius (Lepidus) Paulus.

Footnote 194:

  Possibly the Pelops mentioned by Plutarch (_Cic._ 25), to whom Cicero
  wrote about some honours the Byzantines proposed to confer on him.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 230

negotia chorumque illum, de quo scire vis, cum perspexero, tum scribam,
ne quid ignores. Quid Galli, quid Hispani, quid Sextus agat, vehementer
exspecto. Ea scilicet tu declarabis, qui cetera. Nauseolam tibi tuam
causam otii dedisse facile patiebar. Videbare enim mihi legenti tuas
litteras requiesse paulisper. De Bruto semper ad me omnia perscribito,
ubi sit, quid cogitet. Quem quidem ego spero iam tuto vel solum tota
urbe vagari posse. Verum tamen ——.


                                   IX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Puteolis XV K. Mai, a. 710_]

De re publica multa cognovi ex tuis litteris; quas quidem multiiuges
accepi uno tempore a Vestori liberto. Ad ea autem, quae requiris, brevi
respondebo. Primum vehementer me Cluviana delectant. Sed quod quaeris,
quid arcessierim Chrysippum, tabernae mihi duae corruerunt, reliquaeque
rimas agunt, itaque non solum inquilini, sed mures etiam migraverunt.
Hanc ceteri calamitatem vocant, ego ne incommodum quidem. O Socrates et
Socratici viri! numquam vobis gratiam referam. Di immortales, quam mihi
ista pro nihilo! Sed tamen ea ratio aedificandi initur consiliario
quidem et auctore Vestorio, ut hoc damnum quaestuosum sit.

Hic turba magna est eritque, ut audio, maior.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 231

will look into all that lot of fellows[195] at Baiae, about whom you
wish to know, as you ask me, and will let you know all about them. I am
very anxious to hear what the Gauls, and the Spaniards, and Sextus are
doing. You will, of course, inform me of that as of other things. I am
not sorry your slight attack of sickness gave you an excuse for rest,
for, judging by your letters, you seem to have taken a little holiday.
Always give me full news about Brutus, his movements and his intentions.
I hope he will soon be able to walk about the whole city safely even by
himself. However ——.

Footnote 195:

  _negotium_ here seems to be used as a contemptuous term in the sense
  of "fellow," for which cf. _Att._ I. 12 and V. 18; and to refer to
  Hirtius, Pansa, and Balbus who were idling at Baiae.


                                   IX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, April 17_, B.C. _44_]

From your letters I have learned much about politics. I had a whole
batch of them at the same time from the freedman of Vestorius. However,
I will answer your questions shortly. Firstly, I am delighted about the
Cluvian property. You ask why I sent for Chrysippus. Two of my shops
have fallen down and the rest are cracking: so not only the tenants, but
even the mice, have migrated. Other people call it a calamity, but I
don't count it even a nuisance. O Socrates and followers of Socrates, I
can never thank you sufficiently. Ye gods! how insignificant I count all
such things. However, at the advice and on the suggestion of Vestorius I
have adopted a plan of rebuilding which will make my loss a profit.

There are lots of people here, and I hear there

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 232

Duo quidem quasi designati consules. O di boni! vivit tyrannis, tyrannus
occidit! Eius interfecti morte laetamur, cuius facta defendimus! Itaque
quam severe nos M. Curtius accusat, ut pudeat vivere, neque iniuria. Nam
mori miliens praestitit quam haec pati; quae mihi videntur habitura
etiam vetustatem.

Et Balbus hic est multumque mecum. Ad quem a Vetere litterae datae
pridie Kal. Ianuar., cum a se Caecilius circumsederetur et iam
teneretur, venisse cum maximis copiis Pacorum Parthum; ita sibi esse eum
ereptum multis suis amissis. In qua re accusat Volcacium. Ita mihi
videtur bellum illud instare. Sed Dolabella et Nicias viderint. Idem
Balbus meliora de Gallia. XXI die litteras habebat Germanos illasque
nationes re audita de Caesare legates misisse ad Aurelium, qui est
praepositus ab Hirtio, se, quod imperatum esset, esse facturos. Quid
quaeris? omnia plena pacis, aliter ac mihi Calvena dixerat.


                                   X

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano XIII K. Mai. a. 710_]

Itane vero? hoc meus et tuus Brutus egit, ut Lanuvi esset, ut Trebonius
itineribus deviis proficisceretur in provinciam, ut omnia facta,
scripta, dicta, promissa, cogitata Caesaris plus valerent, quam si ipse
viveret? Meministine me clamare illo ipso primo

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 233

will be more. Two of them are the so-called consuls designate. Good God,
the tyranny lives though the tyrant is dead! We rejoice at his
assassination and defend his actions. So see how severely M. Curtius
criticizes us! We feel ashamed to live, and he is perfectly right. For
to die is a thousand times better than to suffer such things, which seem
to me to be likely to continue for some considerable time.

Balbus, too, is here, and is often with me. He has had a letter from
Vetus, dated the last of December, saying that when Caecilius was
besieged and already within his grasp, the Parthian Pacorus came with a
large force, and so Caecilius was snatched from his hands and he lost
many men. For that he blames Volcacius. So I suppose there is a war
imminent there. But that is Dolabella's and Nicias' look out. Balbus
also has better news about Gaul. Twenty-one days ago he had a letter
that the Germans and the tribes there, on hearing about Caesar, sent
ambassadors to Aurelius, who was appointed by Hirtius, saying that they
would do as they were bidden. In fact everything seems peaceable there,
contrary to what Calvena said.


                                   X

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, April 19_, B.C. _44_]

Is this what it comes to? Is this what our hero Brutus, my hero and
yours, has achieved, that he should have to stay at Lanuvium, that
Trebonius must make his way to his province by roundabout routes; that
all the acts, notes, words, promises, and projects of Caesar should have
more validity than if he were alive? Do you remember that I cried aloud

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 234

Capitolino die debere senatum in Capitolium a praetoribus vocari? Di
immortales, quae tum opera effici potuerunt laetantibus omnibus bonis,
etiam sat bonis, fractis latronibus! Liberalia tu accusas. Quid fieri
tum potuit? iam pridem perieramus. Meministine te clamare causam
perisse, si funere elatus esset? At ille etiam in foro combustus,
laudatusque miserabiliter, servique et egentes in tecta nostra cum
facibus immissi. Quae deinde? ut audeant dicere: "Tune contra Caesaris
nutum?" Haec et alia ferre non possum. Itaque "γῆν πρὸ γῆς" cogito; tua
tamen ὑπηνέμιος.

Nausea iamne plane abiit? Mihi quidem ex tuis litteris coniectanti ita
videbatur. Redeo ad Tebassos, Scaevas, Frangones. Hos tu existimas
confidere se illa habituros stantibus nobis? in quibus plus virtutis
putarunt, quam experti sunt. Pacis isti scilicet amatores et non
latrocinii auctores. At ego, cum tibi de Curtilio scripsi Sextilianoque
fundo, scripsi de Censorino, de Messalla, de Planco, de Postumo, de
genere toto. Melius fuit perisse illo interfecto, quod numquam
accidisset, quam haec videre.

Octavius Neapolim venit XIIII Kal. Ibi eum Balbus

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 235

on that first day on the Capitol[196] that the Senate should be summoned
thither by the praetors? Ye gods! what might we not have accomplished
then, when all the loyalists were rejoicing, and even the half loyal,
while the knaves were crushed. You blame the Liberalia.[197] What could
have been done then? We were done for already. Do you remember you
exclaimed our cause was lost if the funeral took place? But he was even
burned in the forum and a moving oration was delivered in his praise,
and slaves and paupers were incited to attack our houses with torches.
And the end of it all is that they dare to say: "Are you going to oppose
Caesar's will?" Such things as these I cannot bear. So I am thinking of
shifting from land to land. But your land[198] is too exposed.

Footnote 196:

  The murderers of Caesar barricaded themselves on the Capitol after the
  murder, and were visited by Cicero and others.

Footnote 197:

  At a meeting of the Senate on March 17 it was decreed that Caesar's
  _acta_ should be confirmed, that he should have a public funeral, and
  that his will should be read.

Footnote 198:

  Greece.

Has your sickness left you entirely now? So far as I can guess from your
letters it has. I return to the Tebassi, Scaevae, and Frangones.[199] Do
you suppose they will have any confidence in their homesteads, while we
have any power? They have found us to have less courage than they
expected. I suppose we must hold them lovers of peace and not a gang of
brigands. But, when I wrote to you of Curtilius and Sextilianus' farm, I
wrote of Censorinus, Messalla, Plancus, Postumus, and all such cases. It
were better to have perished when he was slain—though it would never
have come to that[200]—than to see such things.

Footnote 199:

  Veterans of Caesar's army, who had had lands of the Pompeian party
  given to them.

Footnote 200:

  Cicero implies that the republican party would have prevailed, if they
  had been bolder after Caesar's death.

Octavius came to Naples on the 18th of April. There Balbus met him the
next morning, and the

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 236

mane postridie, eodemque die mecum in Cumano, illum hereditatem
aditurum. Sed, ut scribis, ῥιξόθεμιν magnam cum Antonio. Buthrotia mihi
tua res est, ut debet, eritque curae. Quod quaeris, iamne ad centena
Cluvianum, adventare videtur. Scilicet primo anno ¯LXXX¯ detersimus.

Quintus pater ad me gravia de filio, maxime quod matri nunc indulgeat,
cui antea bene merenti fuerit inimicus. Ardentes in eum litteras ad me
misit. Ille autem quid agat, si scis, nequedum Roma es profectus,
scribas ad me velim, et hercule si quid aliud. Vehementer delector tuis
litteris.


                                   XI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Cumano XI K. Mai. a. 710_]

Nudius tertius dedi ad te epistulam longiorem; nunc ad ea, quae proxime.
Velim mehercule, Asturae Brutus. Ἀκολασίαν istorum scribis. An censebas
aliter? Equidem etiam maiora exspecto. Cum contionem lego "de tanto
viro, de clarissimo civi," ferre non queo. Etsi ista iam ad risum. Sed
memento, sic alitur consuetudo perditarum contionum, ut nostri illi non
heroes, sed di futuri quidem in gloria sempiterna sint, sed non sine
invidia, ne sine periculo quidem. Verum illis magna consolatio
conscientia

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 237

same day he was with me at Cumae and said Octavius would accept that
inheritance.[201] But as you say, there will be a crow to pick with
Antony. I am attending to your business at Buthrotum,[202] as I ought,
and I will continue to do so. You ask if Cluvius' legacy amounts to
£1,000 yet. Well, in the first year I cleared about £800.[203]

Footnote 201:

  Left in Caesar's will.

Footnote 202:

  Saving the people of Buthrotum from confiscation of their land for
  distribution among Caesar's veterans.

Footnote 203:

  100,000 and 80,000 sesterces respectively.

Quintus is grumbling to me about his son, chiefly because he is now
making much of his mother, while formerly he disliked her in spite of
all she did for him. The letter against him he sent me was written in a
blazing fury. If you know what the youth is doing, and have not left
Rome yet, I should be glad to hear from you, and uncommonly glad for any
other news too. Your letters give me so much pleasure.


                                   XI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Cumae, April 21_, B.C. _44_]

Two days ago I sent you a fairly long letter: now I answer your last. I
wish to heaven Brutus were at Astura. You speak of the wild conduct of
the Caesareans. Did you expect anything else? For my part I look for
worse. When I read a speech about "so great a man, so illustrious a
citizen," it is more than I can bear, though now such talk is an
absurdity. But take note, the habit of wild public speaking is so
fostered nowadays, that, though eternal glory will be the portion of
those friends of ours, who will be held not merely heroes but gods, they
will not escape dislike or even danger. However, they have the great
consolation of being

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 238

maximi et clarissimi facti, nobis quae, qui interfecto rege liberi non
sumus? Sed haec fortuna viderit, quoniam ratio non gubernat.

De Cicerone quae scribis, iucunda mihi sunt; velim sint prospera. Quod
curae tibi est, ut ei suppeditetur ad usum et cultum copiose, per mihi
gratum est, idque ut facias, te etiam atque etiam rogo. De Buthrotiis et
tu recte cogitas, et ego non dimitto istam curam. Suscipiam omnem etiam
actionem, quam video cotidie faciliorem. De Cluviano, quoniam in re mea
me ipsum diligentia vincis, res ad centena perducitur. Ruina rem non
fecit deteriorem, haud scio an etiam fructuosiorem.

Hic mecum Balbus, Hirtius, Pansa. Modo venit Octavius et quidem in
proximam villam Philippi mihi totus deditus. Lentulus Spinther hodie
apud me. Cras mane vadit.


                                  XII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Puteolis X K. Mai. a. 710_]

O mi Attice, vereor, ne nobis Idus Martiae nihil dederint praeter
laetitiam et odii poenam ac doloris. Quae mihi istim adferuntur! quae
hic video!

                   "Ὢ πράξεως καλῆς μέν, ἀτελοῦς δέ."

Scis, quam diligam Siculos et quam illam clientelam honestam iudicem.
Multa illis Caesar neque me

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 239

conscious of a heroic and magnificent deed, but what have we, who have
killed a king and yet are not free? However, this lies in fortune's
hands, since reason no longer rules.

What you tell me of my son is welcome news; I hope all will go well. I
am exceedingly grateful to you for arranging that he shall be supplied
with sufficient for luxury as well as necessities, and I beg you again
and again to continue to do so. You are right about the people of
Buthrotum, and I am not remitting my attention. I will undertake their
whole case, which is daily looking simpler. As for Cluvius' inheritance,
since you are more anxious about my affairs than I am myself, it is
approaching £1,000.[204] The fall of some houses did not depreciate it;
indeed, I am not sure it did not make it better.

Footnote 204:

  100,000 sesterces.

Balbus, Hirtius, and Pansa are here with me. Octavius has just come to
stay, and that, too, in the very next house, Philippus' place, and he is
devoted to me. Lentulus Spinther is staying with me to-day. To-morrow
early he is going.


                                  XII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, April 22_, B.C. _44_]

My dear Atticus, I fear the Ides of March may have given us nothing but
our joy and satisfaction of our hatred and resentment. What news I get
from Rome! What things I see here! "The deed was fair but its result is
naught."

You know how fond I am of the Sicilians, and how great an honour I count
it to be their patron. Caesar granted them many privileges, and I was
pleased at

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 240

invito, etsi Latinitas erat non ferenda. Verum tamen. Ecce autem
Antonius accepta grandi pecunia fixit legem a dictatore comitiis latam,
qua Siculi cives Romani; cuius rei vivo illo mentio nulla. Quid?
Deiotari nostri causa non similis? Dignus ille quidem omni regno, sed
non per Fulviam. Sescenta similia. Verum illuc redeo. Tam claram tamque
testatam rem tamque iustam Buthrotiam non tenebimus aliqua ex parte? et
eo quidem magis, quo iste plura?

Nobiscum hic perhonorifice et peramice Octavius. Quem quidem sui
Caesarem salutabant, Philippus non, itaque ne nos quidem; quem nego
posse bonum civem. Ita multi circumstant, qui quidem nostris mortem
minitantur. Negant haec ferri posse. Quid censes, cum Romam puer
venerit, ubi nostri liberatores tuti esse non possunt? Qui quidem semper
erunt clari, conscientia vero facti sui etiam beati. Sed nos, nisi me
fallit, iacebimus. Itaque exire aveo, "ubi nec Pelopidarum," inquit.
Haud amo vel hos designatos, qui etiam declamare me coëgerunt, ut ne
apud aquas quidem acquiescere liceret. Sed hoc meae nimiae facilitatis.
Nam id erat quondam quasi necesse, nunc, quoquo modo se res habet, non
est item.

Quam dudum nihil habeo, quod ad te scribam! Scribo tamen, non ut
delectem his litteris, sed ut

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 241

it, though to give them the Latin rights was intolerable. However ——.
But here is Antony taking a huge bribe and posting up a law said to have
been carried by the dictator in the Comitia, which gives the Sicilians
the citizenship, though there was no mention of such a thing when Caesar
was alive. Again, is not our friend Deiotarus' case just the same? He is
certainly worthy of any kingdom, but not of one bought through Fulvia.
There are thousands of other cases. However, to return to my point.
Shall I not be able to maintain to some extent my case for the people of
Buthrotum, since it is so well supported by witnesses and so just,
especially as he is free with his grants?

Octavius is here with us on terms of respect and friendship. His people
address him as Caesar, but Philippus does not, and so I do not either. I
hold that it is impossible for a loyal citizen to do so. We are
surrounded by so many who threaten death to our friends, and declare
they cannot bear the present state of affairs. What do you think will
happen, when this boy comes to Rome, where those who have set us free
cannot live in safety. They, indeed, will ever be famous, and even happy
in the consciousness of their deed. But we, unless I am much mistaken,
shall be crushed. So I long to go "where no bruit of the sons of Pelops
may reach my ears,"[205] as the saying is. I have no love even for these
consuls designate, who have forced me to declaim to them, so that I
can't have peace even by the sea. But that is due to my excess of good
nature. For at one time declamation was more or less a necessity; now,
however things turn out, it is not.

Footnote 205:

  The full quotation, which comes from the _Pelops_ of Accius, runs:

                                              "evolem, ubi nec
    Pelopidarum nomen nec facta aut famam audiam."

How long it is since I have had anything to write to you! However, I
write, not to charm you with

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 242

eliciam tuas. Tu, si quid erit de ceteris, de Bruto utique, quicquid.
Haec conscripsi X Kal. accubans apud Vestorium, hominem remotum a
dialecticis, in arithmeticis satis exercitatum.


                                  XIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Puteolis VI K. Mai. a. 710_]

Septimo denique die litterae mihi redditae sunt, quae erant a te XIII
Kal. datae; quibus quaeris atque etiam me ipsum nescire arbitraris,
utrum magis tumulis prospectuque an ambulatione ἁλιτενεῖ delecter. Est
mehercule, ut dicis, utriusque loci tanta amoenitas, ut dubitem, utra
anteponenda sit.

[Sidenote: _Iliad_ x. 228]

              —— "Ἀλλ' οὐ δαιτὸς ἐπηράτου ἔργα μέμηλεν,
              ἀλλὰ λίην μέγα πῆμα, διοτρεφές, εἰσορόωντες
              δείδιμεν· ἐν δοιῇ δὲ σαωσέμεν ἢ ἀπολέσθαι."

Quamvis enim tu magna et mihi iucunda scripseris de D. Bruti adventu ad
suas legiones, in quo spem maximam video, tamen, si est bellum civile
futurum, quod certe erit, si Sextus in armis permanebit, quem
permansurum esse certo scio, quid nobis faciendum sit, ignoro. Neque
enim iam licebit, quod Caesaris bello licuit, neque huc neque illuc.
Quemcumque enim haec pars perditorum laetatum Caesaris morte putabit
(laetitiam autem apertissime tulimus omnes), hunc in hostium numero
habebit; quae res ad caedem maximam spectat. Restat, ut in castra Sexti
aut, si forte, Bruti nos conferamus. Res odiosa et

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 243

my letter, but to draw your answers. Do you send me any news you have,
especially about Brutus, but about anything else too. I write this on
the 22nd while at dinner with Vestorius,[206] a man who has no idea of
philosophy, but who is well up in arithmetic.

Footnote 206:

  A banker at Puteoli.


                                  XIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, April 26_, B.C. _44_]

The letter you sent on the 19th did not reach me for seven days. In it
you ask whether I take more pleasure in hills and a view or a walk by
the silver sea, and you seem to think I may not know myself. Upon my
word, both are so beautiful, as you say, that I doubt which to prefer.
"But no thought have we of the service of a dainty meal; nay, seeing a
woeful heavy bane sent on us by heaven, we shudder in doubt whether we
shall be saved or perish." For although you have sent me great and
welcome news about D. Brutus having joined his troops, in which I see
great hopes, still, if there is going to be civil war—and that there
must be, if Sextus stays under arms, as I know for certain he will—I
don't know what we are to do. For now there will be no chance of sitting
on the fence, as there was in Caesar's war. For, if this gang of
ruffians thinks anyone was rejoiced at the death of Caesar—and we all of
us showed our joy quite openly—they will count him an enemy; and that
looks like a considerable massacre. Our alternative is to take refuge in
Sextus' camp, or join ourselves to Brutus if we can. That is a hateful
business and unsuitable for our age,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 244

aliena nostris aetatibus et incerto exitu belli, et nescio quo pacto
tibi ego possum, mihi tu dicere.

[Sidenote: _Iliad_ v. 428]

              "Τέκνον ἐμόν, οὔ τοι δέδοται πολεμήια ἔργα,
              ἀλλὰ σύγ' ἱμερόεντα μετέρχεο ἔργα λόγοιο."

Sed haec fors viderit, ea quae talibus in rebus plus quam ratio potest.
Nos autem id videamus, quod in nobis ipsis esse debet, ut, quicquid
acciderit, fortiter et sapienter feramus, et accidisse hominibus
meminerimus, nosque cum multum litterae tum non minimum Idus quoque
Martiae consolentur. Suscipe nunc meam deliberationem, qua sollicitor.
Ita multa veniunt in mentem in utramque partem. Proficiscor, ut
constitueram, legatus in Graeciam: caedis inpendentis periculum non
nihil vitare videor, sed casurus in aliquam vituperationem, quod rei
publicae defuerim tam gravi tempore. Sin autem mansero, fore me quidem
video in discrimine, sed accidere posse suspicor, ut prodesse possim rei
publicae. Iam illa consilia privata sunt, quod sentio valde esse utile
ad confirmationem Ciceronis me illuc venire; nec alia causa profectionis
mihi ulla fuit tum, cum consilium cepi legari a Caesare. Tota igitur hac
de re, ut soles, si quid ad me pertinere putas, cogitabis.

Redeo nunc ad epistulam tuam. Scribis enim esse rumores me, ad lacum
quod habeo, venditurum, minusculam vero villam Quinto traditurum vel
impenso pretio, quo introducatur, ut tibi Quintus filius dixerit, dotata
Aquilia. Ego vero de venditione nihil cogito,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 245

especially considering the uncertainty of war; and somehow or other it
seems to me that I can say to you and you to me: "My son, to thee are
not given the arts of war; nay, do thou rather compass the witching arts
of speech."[207] But that we must leave to chance, which is of more
importance in such matters than reason. For ourselves, let us look to
the one thing that ought to be in our power, that, whatever may happen,
we may bear it with courage and philosophy, remembering that we are but
mortal, and console ourselves a good deal with literature and not least
with the Ides of March. Now come to my aid in settling a point which is
causing me anxiety. So much to be said on both sides occurs to me. If I
set off, as I intended, on a free embassy to Greece, it seems as though
I might avoid to some extent the danger of a massacre which is
threatening, but I shall not escape some blame for deserting the state
in such a crisis. On the other hand, if I stay, I see I shall be in
danger, but I suspect there is a possibility that I may help the State.
There are also private considerations, that I think it would be of great
use in settling my son down if I went to Athens; and that was the only
reason for my going, when I had the idea of getting the offer of an
embassy from Caesar. So consider every side of the case, as you usually
do in my affairs.

Footnote 207:

  In the original the last word is γάμοιο not λόγοιο.

I return now to your letter. You say there are rumours that I am
thinking of selling my house on the Lucrine lake and of handing over to
Quintus my tiny villa at quite a fancy price, that he may bring the
heiress Aquilia to it, as young Quintus says. I have had no thought of
selling it, unless I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 246

nisi quid, quod magis me delectet, invenero. Quintus autem de emendo
nihil curat hoc tempore. Satis enim torquetur debitione dotis, in qua
mirificas Q. Egnatio gratias agit; a ducenda autem uxore sic abhorret,
ut libero lectulo neget esse quicquam iucundius. Sed haec quoque
hactenus.

Redeo enim ad miseram seu nullam potius rem publicam. M. Antonius ad me
scripsit de restitutione Sex. Clodi; quam honorifice, quod ad me
attinet, ex ipsius litteris cognosces (misi enim tibi exemplum), quam
dissolute, quam turpiter quamque ita perniciose, ut non numquam Caesar
desiderandus esse videatur, facile existimabis. Quae enim Caesar numquam
neque fecisset neque passus esset, ea nunc ex falsis eius commentariis
proferuntur. Ego autem Antonio facillimum me praebui. Etenim ille,
quoniam semel induxit animum sibi licere, quod vellet, fecisset nihilo
minus me invito. Itaque mearum quoque litterarum misi tibi exemplum.


                                 XIIIa

                    ANTONIUS COS. S. D. M. CICERONI.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Romae inter a. d. X et VII K. Mai. a. 710_]

Occupationibus est factum meis et subita tua profectione, ne tecum coram
de hac re agerem. Quam ob causam vereor, ne absentia mea levior sit apud
te. Quodsi bonitas tua responderit iudicio meo, quod semper habui de te,
gaudebo.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 247

find something that suits me better, while Quintus is not thinking of
buying it at the present time. He is quite bothered enough with repaying
the dowry,[208] and is expressing the deepest gratitude to Egnatius for
his assistance. To marrying again he is so averse that he declares a
bachelor's couch is the most comfortable in the world. But enough of
this also.

Footnote 208:

  To Pomponia, sister of Atticus, whom he had recently divorced.

For now I return to the crushed or rather non-existent republic. M.
Antonius has written to me about the recall of Sex. Clodius. You will
see from the copy I include that the tone of his letter, so far as
concerns myself, is complimentary enough. But you can easily imagine the
proposal is so unprincipled, so disgraceful, and so mischievous, that at
times one almost wishes for Caesar back again. For things that Caesar
never would have done, nor allowed to be done, are now being brought
forward from forged notes of his. However, I have shown myself quite
complaisant to Antonius. For when he has once got it into his head that
he may do what he chooses, he would have done it just as readily against
my will. So I have sent you a copy of my letter too.


                                 XIIIa

          ANTONY THE CONSUL SENDS HIS GREETINGS TO M. CICERO.

[Sidenote: _Rome, April 22 to 25_, B.C. _44_]

It was only because I was so busy and you departed so suddenly, that I
did not see you personally about the following request. So I fear I may
have less weight with you in my absence. But if your goodness of heart
answers to the opinion I have always had of you, I shall be very glad.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 248

A Caesare petii, ut Sex. Clodium restitueret; impetravi. Erat mihi in
animo etiam tum sic uti beneficio eius, si tu concessisses. Quo magis
laboro, ut tua voluntate id per me facere nunc liceat. Quodsi duriorem
te eius miserae et adflictae fortunae praebes, non contendam ego
adversus te, quamquam videor debere tueri commentarium Caesaris. Sed
mehercule, si humaniter et sapienter et amabiliter in me cogitare vis,
facilem profecto te praebebis, et voles P. Clodium, in optima spe puerum
repositum, existimare non te insectatum esse, cum potueris, amicos
paternos. Patere, obsecro, te pro re publica videri gessisse simultatem
cum patre eius, non quod contempseris hanc familiam. Honestius enim et
libentius deponimus inimicitias rei publicae nomine susceptas quam
contumaciae. Me deinde sine ad hanc opinionem iam nunc dirigere puerum
et tenero animo eius persuadere non esse tradendas posteris inimicitias.
Quamquam tuam fortunam, Cicero, ab omni periculo abesse certum habeo,
tamen arbitror malle te quietam senectutem et honorificam potius agere
quam sollicitam. Postremo meo iure te hoc beneficium rogo. Nihil enim
non tua causa feci. Quodsi non impetro, per me Clodio daturus non sum,
ut intellegas, quanti apud me auctoritas tua sit, atque eo te
placabiliorem praebeas.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 249

I petitioned Caesar for the return of Sex. Clodius, and obtained my
request. It was my intention even then only to use his favour if you
allowed. So I am now the more anxious that you may let me do it with
your permission. But, if you show yourself hard-hearted to his
affliction and misery, I will not contend with you, though I think I
ought to observe Caesar's memoranda. But upon my word, if you are ready
to take a generous, philosophical, and amiable view of my actions, you
will, I am sure, show your indulgence, and will wish that most promising
youth, P. Clodius, to think that you did not act spitefully to his
father's friends when you had the chance. I beseech you to let it seem
that your feud with his father was on public grounds, not because you
despised the family. For we can lay aside quarrels we took up on public
grounds with more honour and more readiness than those that come from a
personal insult. So give me a chance of inculcating this lesson, and
while the boy's mind is still receptive, let us convince him that
quarrels should not be handed down from generation to generation. Though
I know your fortune, Cicero, is above any danger, yet I think you would
rather enjoy old age with peace and honour than with anxiety. Finally I
feel a right to ask you this favour, for I have done all I could for
your sake. If I do not gain it, I shall not grant Clodius his
restoration, so that you may understand how much your authority weighs
in my eyes, and that may make you all the more placable.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 250


                                 XIIIb

                       CICERO ANTONIO COS. S. D.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Puteolis VI K. Mai. 710_]

Quod mecum per litteras agis, unam ob causam mallem coram egisses. Non
enim solum ex oratione, sed etiam ex vultu et oculis et fronte, ut
aiunt, meum erga te amorem perspicere potuisses. Nam, cum te semper
amavi, primum tuo studio, post etiam beneficio provocatus, tum his
temporibus res publica te mihi ita commendavit, ut cariorem habeam
neminem. Litterae vero tuae cum amantissime tum honorificentissime
scriptae sic me adfecerunt, ut non dare tibi beneficium viderer, sed
accipere a te ita petente, ut inimicum meum, necessarium tuum me invito
servare nolles, cum id nullo negotio facere posses. Ego vero tibi istuc,
mi Antoni, remitto, atque ita, ut me a te, cum iis verbis scripseris,
liberalissime atque honorificentissime tractatum existimem, idque cum
totum, quoquo modo se res haberet, tibi dandum putarem, tum do etiam
humanitati et naturae meae. Nihil enim umquam non modo acerbum in me
fuit, sed ne paulo quidem tristius aut severius, quam necessitas rei
publicae postulavit. Accedit, ut ne in ipsum quidem Clodium meum insigne
odium fuerit umquam, semperque ita statui, non esse insectandos
inimicorum amicos, praesertim humiliores, nec his praesidiis nosmet
ipsos esse spoliandos. Nam de puero Clodio tuas partes esse arbitror, ut
eius animum tenerum, quem ad modum scribis, iis opinionibus imbuas, ut
ne quas

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 251


                                 XIIIb

                 CICERO TO ANTONY THE CONSUL, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, April 26_, B.C. _44_]

There is one reason why I wish you had made personally the request you
are making by letter. Then you could have seen my affection for you not
only from what I said, but from my "expression, eyes and brow," as the
phrase goes. For I have always had an affection for you, urged thereto
at first by your attention to me and afterwards by benefits received,
and in these days public affairs have so recommended you to me that
there is no one for whom I have more regard. The letter you have written
to me in such a friendly and flattering tone makes me feel as though I
were receiving a favour from you, not granting one to you, since you
refuse to recall your friend, who was my enemy, against my will, though
you could quite easily do so. Of course I grant your request, my dear
Antony, and I think myself, too, most liberally and honourably treated,
when you address me in such a strain. I should have thought it right to
grant it you freely, whatever the facts had been, and besides, I am
gratifying my own natural kindliness. For I never had any bitterness or
even the slightest sternness or severity in me, except what was demanded
by public necessity. Besides, I never had any special grudge against
Clodius himself, and I always laid down the rule that one should not
attack one's enemies' friends, especially their humbler friends, nor
should we ourselves be deprived of such supporters. As regards the boy
Clodius I think it is your duty to imbue his "receptive mind," as you
say, with the idea that

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 252

inimicitias residere in familiis nostris arbitretur. Contendi cum P.
Clodio, cum ego publicam causam, ille suam defenderet. Nostras
concertationes res publica diiudicavit. Si viveret, mihi cum illo nulla
contentio iam maneret. Quare, quoniam hoc a me sic petis, ut, quae tua
potestas est, ea neges te me invito usurum, puero quoque hoc a me dabis,
si tibi videbitur, non quo aut aetas nostra ab illius aetate quicquam
debeat periculi suspicari, aut dignitas mea ullam contentionem
extimescat, sed ut nosmet ipsi inter nos coniunctiores simus, quam adhuc
fuimus. Interpellantibus enim his inimicitiis animus tuus mihi magis
patuit quam domus. Sed haec hactenus.

Illud extremum. Ego, quae te velle quaeque ad te pertinere arbitrabor,
semper sine ulla dubitatione summo studio faciam. Hoc velim tibi penitus
persuadeas.


                                  XIV

                          CICERO ATTICO S. D.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano a. d. V K. Mai. a. 710_]

"Iteradum eadem ista mihi." Coronatus Quintus noster Parilibus! Solusne?
Etsi addis Lamiam. Quod demiror equidem: sed scire cupio, qui fuerint
alii; quamquam satis scio nisi improbum neminem. Explanabis igitur hoc
diligentius. Ego autem casu, cum dedissem ad te litteras VI Kal. satis
multis verbis, tribus fere horis post accepi tuas et magni quidem
ponderis. Itaque ioca tua plena facetiarum de haeresi

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 253

there is no enmity between our families. I fought P. Clodius because I
was fighting for the State, he for his own hand; and the State decided
the merits of our controversy. If he were alive now I should have no
further quarrel with him. So, since in making your request you say you
will not use the power you have against my will, you may make this
concession to the boy too in my name, if you will; not that a man of my
age has anything to fear from a youth of his, or that a person of my
position needs shrink from any quarrel, but that we may be more intimate
than we have been as yet. For these feuds have come between us, and so
your heart has been more open to me than your house. But enough of this.

I have one thing to add, that, whatever I think you wish, and whatever
is to your interest, I shall never have any hesitation in carrying out
with all my heart and soul. Of that I hope you will feel fully
persuaded.


                                  XIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, April 27_, B.C. _44_]

"Repeat your tale again to me."[209] Our nephew wearing a crown at the
Parilia! Was he alone? Though you add Lamia, which astonishes me. But I
should like to know what others there were, though I am perfectly sure
there were none but knaves. So please explain more in detail. As it
happened, when I had sent you a pretty long letter on the 26th, about
three hours afterwards I received yours, and a bulky one too. So there
is no necessity for me to tell you that I had a good laugh at your witty

Footnote 209:

  From the _Iliona_ of Pacuvius.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 254

Vestoriana et de Pherionum more Puteolano risisse me satis nihil est
necesse rescribere. Πολιτικώτερα illa videamus.

Ita Brutos Cassiumque defendis, quasi eos ego reprehendam; quos satis
laudare non possum. Rerum ego vitia collegi, non hominum. Sublato enim
tyranno tyrannida manere video. Nam, quae ille facturus non fuit, ea
fiunt, ut de Clodio, de quo mihi exploratum est illum non modo non
facturum, sed etiam ne passurum quidem fuisse. Sequetur Rufio
Vestorianus, Victor numquam scriptus, ceteri, quis non? Cui servire ipsi
non potuimus, eius libellis paremus. Nam Liberalibus quis potuit in
senatum non venire? Fac id potuisse aliquo modo; num etiam, cum
venissemus, libere potuimus sententiam dicere? nonne omni ratione
veterani, qui armati aderant, cum praesidii nos nihil haberemus,
defendendi fuerunt? Illam sessionem Capitolinam mihi non placuisse tu
testis es. Quid ergo? ista culpa Brutorum? Minime illorum quidem, sed
aliorum brutorum, qui se cautos ac sapientes putant; quibus satis fuit
laetari, non nullis etiam gratulari, nullis permanere. Sed praeterita
omittamus; istos omni cura praesidioque tueamur et, quem ad modum tu
praecipis, contenti Idibus Martiis simus; quae quidem nostris amicis
divinis viris aditum ad caelum dederunt, libertatem populo Romano non

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 255

remarks about the sect of Vestorius[210] and the Puteolian custom of the
Pheriones. Let us consider the more political part.

Footnote 210:

  Vestorius was a banker (cf. XIV. 12), and Atticus had probably played
  on the two senses of αἵρεσις, "sect" and "grasping." The allusion to
  the Pheriones is inexplicable.

You defend Brutus and Cassius as though you thought I blamed them,
though I cannot find praise enough for them. It is the weak points of
the situation, not of the persons that I put together. For though the
tyrant is dead, I see the tyranny persists. For things that he would not
have done are being done now, as, for example, the recalling of
Clodius—a thing I am sure he had no intention of doing and would not
even have allowed to be done. Vestorius' enemy Rufio will follow, and
Victor, whose name was never in Caesar's notes, and the rest; every one
in fact. We could not be Caesar's slaves, but we bow down to his
note-books. For who dared absent himself from the Senate on the
Liberalia?[211] Suppose it had been possible somehow: even when we did
come, could we speak our mind freely? Had we not to take precious good
care of the veterans, who were there under arms, since we had no support
ourselves. You can bear witness that that sitting still on the Capitol
was not approved by me. Well, was that the fault of Brutus and the rest?
Not a bit of it: it was the fault of the other brute beasts, who think
themselves cautious and canny. They thought it enough to rejoice, some
of them to go so far as to congratulate, none to stand their ground. But
let us put the past behind us: let us guard our heroes with all our care
and protection: and, as you say, let us be content with the Ides of
March. That day gave our friends, who are more than men, an entrance to
heaven, but it did not give freedom to

Footnote 211:

  March 17. Cf. _Att._ XIV. 10.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 256

dederunt. Recordare tua. Nonne meministi clamare te omnia perisse, si
ille funere elatus esset? Sapienter id quidem. Itaque, ex eo quae
manarint, vides.

Quae scribis K. luniis Antonium de provinciis relaturum, ut et ipse
Gallias habeat, et utrisque dies prorogetur, licebitne decerni libere?
Si licuerit, libertatem esse recuperatam laetabor; si non licuerit, quid
mihi attulerit ista domini mutatio praeter laetitiam, quam oculis cepi
iusto interitu tyranni? Rapinas scribis ad Opis fieri; quas nos quoque
tum videbamus. Ne nos et liberati ab egregiis viris nec liberi sumus.
Ita laus illorum est, culpa nostra. Et hortaris me, ut historias
scribam, ut colligam tanta eorum scelera, a quibus etiam nunc obsidemur!
Poterone eos ipsos non laudare, qui te obsignatorem adhibuerunt? Nec
mehercule me raudusculum movet, sed homines benevolos, qualescumque
sunt, grave est insequi contumelia. Sed de omnibus meis consiliis, ut
scribis, existimo exploratius nos ad K. Iunias statuere posse. Ad quas
adero, et omni ope atque opera enitar adiuvante me scilicet auctoritate
tua et gratia et summa aequitate causae, ut de Buthrotiis senatus
consultum, quale scribis, fiat. Quod me cogitare iubes, cogitabo
equidem, etsi tibi dederam superiore epistula cogitandum. Tu autem quasi
iam recuperata re publica vicinis tuis Massiliensibus sua reddis. Haec
armis,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 257

the Roman people. Recall your words. Don't you remember how you
exclaimed that all was lost if Caesar had a public funeral? And very
wise it was. So you see what has come of the funeral.

You say Antony is going to bring a proposal before the Senate on the 1st
of June about the allotment of provinces, that he should have Gaul and
that both his own and his colleague's tenure should be prolonged. Will
the House be allowed to vote freely? If so, I shall rejoice that liberty
has been regained; if not, what has this change of masters brought me
except the joy of feasting my eyes on the just death of a tyrant? You
say there is plundering at the Temple of Ops: I saw it then with my own
eyes. Yea, we have been set free by heroes and are not free after all.
So theirs is the praise and ours the blame. And you advise me to write
history, to collect all the crimes of those who even now have us under
their thumb. Shall I be able to resist praising men who have called you
in as a witness?[212] I give you my word it is not the petty gain that
influences me, but it goes against the grain to heap contumely on the
heads of benevolent persons whatever their character. But, as you say, I
think we can make up our minds with more certainty about all my plans by
the 1st of June. I shall be present then, and of course with the
assistance of your authority and popularity, and the absolute justice of
your case, I shall strive with all my might to obtain the senatorial
decree that you mention about the people of Buthrotum. What you bid me
consider, I will consider, though it is what I asked you to consider in
a former letter. But here you are wanting to get back their rights for
your neighbours the Massilians, as though we had recovered the republic.
Perhaps they might be restored by arms—but how strong our

Footnote 212:

  To wills in which legacies were left to Cicero. Cf. _Att._ XIV. 3.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 258

quae quam firma habeamus, ignoro, restitui fortasse possunt, auctoritate
non possunt.

Epistula brevis, quae postea a te scripta est, sane mihi fuit iucunda de
Bruti ad Antonium et de eiusdem ad te litteris. Posse videntur esse
meliora, quam adhuc fuerunt. Sed nobis, ubi simus et quo iam nunc nos
conferamus, providendum est.


                                   XV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano K. Mai. a. 710_]

O mirificum Dolabellam meum! iam enim dico meum; antea, crede mihi,
subdubitabam. Magnam ἀναθεώρησιν res habet, de saxo, in crucem, columnam
tollere, locum illum sternendum locare! Quid quaeris? heroica.
Sustulisse mihi videtur simulationem desiderii, adhuc quae serpebat in
dies et inveterata verebar ne periculosa nostris tyrannoctonis esset.
Nunc prorsus adsentior tuis litteris speroque meliora. Quamquam istos
ferre non possum, qui, dum se pacem velle simulant, acta nefaria
defendunt. Sed non possunt omnia simul. Incipit res melius ire, quam
putaram. Nec vero discedam, nisi cum tu me id honeste putabis facere
posse. Bruto certe meo nullo loco deero, idque, etiamsi mihi cum illo
nihil fuisset, facerem propter eius singularem incredibilemque virtutem.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 259

arms are I do not know—by influence they certainly cannot.

The short letter you wrote after the other, about Brutus' letter to
Antony and also his to you, delighted me much. It looks as though things
might be better than they have been at present. But we must look
carefully into our present position and our immediate movements.


                                   XV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, May 1_, B.C. _44_]

Well done my Dolabella! For now I call him mine: up to now, you know, I
had some doubts. This will make people open their eyes—hurling from the
rock, crucifixion, pulling down the column[213] and ordering the place
to be paved. Why, these are heroic deeds. I take it he has put an end to
this feigning of regret, which up to now was creeping on day by day,
and, if it became a habit, I was afraid it might be dangerous to our
tyrannicides. Now I quite agree with your letter and hope for better
things. However I cannot put up with the people who under a pretence of
wishing for peace defend criminal actions. But still we can't have
everything at once. Things are beginning to get better than I had
expected, and of course I will not go away, unless you think I can do so
honourably. My friend Brutus certainly I will never desert; and I should
act in the same way, even if there were no ties between us, on account
of his extraordinary and incredible strength of character.

Footnote 213:

  A column erected in honour of Caesar by the Pseudo-Marius. Riotous
  mass-meetings were held round it, and it was the people who took part
  in these who were summarily executed by Dolabella without any trial.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 260

Piliae nostrae villam totam, quaeque in villa sunt, trado, in Pompeianum
ipse proficiscens K. Maiis. Quam velim Bruto persuadeas, ut Asturae sit!


                                  XVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Puteolis in hortis Cluvianis V Non. Mai. a. 710_]

V Nonas conscendens ab hortis Cluvianis in phaselum epicopum has dedi
litteras, cum Piliae nostrae villam ad Lucrinum, vilicos, procuratores
tradidissem. Ipse autem eo die in Paeti nostri tyrotarichum imminebam;
perpaucis diebus in Pompeianum, post in haec Puteolana et Cumana regna
renavigare. O loca ceteroqui valde expetenda, interpellantium autem
multitudine paene fugienda!

Sed ad rem ut veniam, o Dolabellae nostri magnam ἀριστείαν! Quanta est
ἀναθεώρησις! Equidem laudare eum et hortari non desisto. Recte tu
omnibus epistulis significas, quid de re, quid de viro sentias. Mihi
quidem videtur Brutus noster iam vel coronam auream per forum ferre
posse. Quis enim audeat laedere proposita cruce aut saxo, praesertim
tantis plausibus, tanta approbatione infimorum?

Nunc, mi Attice, me fac ut expedias. Cupio, cum Bruto nostro adfatim
satis fecerim, excurrere in Graeciam. Magni interest Ciceronis, vel mea
potius vel mehercule utriusque, me intervenire discenti.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 261

I hand over the villa and all there is in it to our dear Pilia, as I am
setting out for Pompeii on the 1st of May. How I wish you could persuade
Brutus to come to Astura!


                                  XVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli May 3_, B.C. _44_]

I despatch this letter on the 3rd, as I embark in a rowing boat from
Cluvius' gardens, after handing over the villa at the Lucrine lake to
Pilia with its servants and care-takers. Myself I am threatening our
friend Paetus' cheese and herrings for that day; in a few days I am
going to Pompeii and after that sailing back to my domains here at
Puteoli and Cumae. What very attractive places they are, if it were not
that one almost has to shun them on account of the crowd of visitors.

But to return to the point, what a magnificent stroke of our friend
Dolabella! How it will make people open their eyes. For my part I keep
on praising and encouraging him. You are right in what you say in every
letter about the deed and about the man. To me it seems that our friend
Brutus could walk through the forum with a golden crown on his head now.
For who would dare to hurt him with the cross and rock before his eyes,
especially when the rabble have shown such applause and approbation?

Now, my dear Atticus, do put things straight for me. I want to run over
to Greece, as soon as I have quite satisfied Brutus. It is a matter of
great concern to my son, or rather to me, or upon my word to both of us,
that I should drop in upon

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 262

Nam epistula Leonidae, quam ad me misisti, quid habet, quaeso, in quo
magno opere laetemur? Numquam ille mihi satis laudari videbitur, cum ita
laudabitur: "Quo modo nunc est." Non est fidentis hoc testimonium, sed
potius timentis. Herodi autem mandaram, ut mihi κατὰ μίτον scriberet. A
quo adhuc nulla littera est. Vereor, ne nihil habuerit, quod mihi, cum
cognossem, iucundum putaret fore.

Quod ad Xenonem scripsisti, valde mihi gratum est; nihil enim deesse
Ciceroni cum ad officium tum ad existimationem meam pertinet. Flammam
Flaminium audio Romae esse. Ad eum scripsi me tibi mandasse per
litteras, ut de Montani negotio cum eo loquerere, et velim cures
epistulam, quam ad eum misi, reddendam, et ipse, quod commodo tuo fiat,
cum eo conloquare. Puto, si quid in homine pudoris est, praestaturum
eum, ne sero cum damno dependatur. De Attica pergratum mihi fecisti quod
curasti, ante scirem recte esse quam non belle fuisse.


                                  XVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Pompeiano IV Non. Mai. a. 710_]

In Pompeianum veni V Nonas Maias, cum pridie, ut antea ad te scripsi,
Piliam in Cumano conlocavissem. Ibi mihi cenanti litterae tuae sunt
redditae, quas dederas Demetrio liberto pr. Kal.; in quibus multa
sapienter, sed tamen talia, quem ad modum tute scribebas, ut omne
consilium in fortuna positum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 263

him at his studies. For what is there to give us any particular
satisfaction in the letter of Leonidas, which you have sent to me? I
shall never be content with his praise, when it is phrased, "as things
go at present." There is no evidence of confidence, rather of anxiety in
that. Again I had commissioned Herodes to write to me in detail: but as
yet I have not had a single syllable from him. I am afraid he has had no
news that he thought would gratify me, if I heard it.

I am very grateful to you for writing to Xeno; for that my son should
not be short of money concerns both my duty and my reputation. I hear
that Flaminius Flamma is in Rome. I have written to tell him that I have
instructed you by letter to speak to him about Montanus' business: and,
I should be glad if you would see that the letter I have sent for him is
delivered, and would speak with him at your leisure. I think, if the man
has any sense of shame, he will see that the payment is not deferred to
my loss. You were very kind in informing me of Attica's recovery before
I knew of her illness.


                                  XVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Pompeii May 4_, B.C. 88]

I reached Pompeii on the 3rd of May, having established Pilia in my
place at Cumae the day before, as I told you in a former letter. While I
was at dinner there, the letter you had given to the freedman Demetrius
on the last of April was delivered. There was a lot of wise advice in
it, but, as you admit yourself, with the reservation

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 264

videretur. Itaque his de rebus ex tempore et coram. De Buthrotio negotio
utinam quidem Antonium conveniam! Multum profecto proficiam. Sed non
arbitrantur eum a Capua declinaturum; quo quidem metuo ne magno rei
publicae malo venerit. Quod idem L. Caesari videbatur, quem pridie
Neapoli adfectum graviter videram. Quam ob rem ista nobis ad Kal. Iunias
tractanda et perficienda sunt. Sed hactenus.

Quintus filius ad patrem acerbissimas litteras misit; quae sunt ei
redditae, cum venissemus in Pompeianum. Quarum tamen erat caput Aquiliam
novercam non esse laturum. Sed hoc tolerabile fortasse, illud vero, se a
Caesare habuisse omnia, nihil a patre, reliqua sperare ab Antonio—o
perditum hominem! Sed μελήσει.

Ad Brutum nostrum, ad Cassium, ad Dolabellam epistulas scripsi. Earum
exempla tibi misi, non ut deliberarem, reddundaene essent. Plane enim
iudico esse reddendas, quod non dubito quin tu idem existimaturus sis.

Ciceroni meo, mi Attice, suppeditabis, quantum videbitur, meque hoc tibi
onus imponere patiere. Quae adhuc fecisti, mihi sunt gratissima. Librum
meum illum ἀνέκδοτον nondum, ut volui, perpolivi; ista vero, quae tu
contexi vis, aliud quoddam separatum volumen exspectant. Ego autem,
credas mihi velim, minore periculo existimo contra illas nefarias

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 265

that everything seems to depend on chance. So these points we will
discuss on the spot when we meet. As regards the business about
Buthrotum I only wish I could meet Antony. I am sure I could make good
headway with him. But people think he won't stir from Capua, and I fear
his going there will do a great deal of harm to the state. L. Caesar,
whom I saw yesterday very ill at Naples, thought the same too. So I
shall have to handle this subject and get it settled on the 1st of June.
But enough of this.

Young Quintus has sent his father a most unpleasant letter, which was
delivered when we reached Pompeii. The chief point of it was that he
would not put up with Aquilia as a step-mother: but that perhaps is
excusable. But to say he owed everything to Caesar, nothing to his
father, and for the future he looked to Antonius—what a scoundrel!
However that shall be attended to.

I have written to Brutus, to Cassius and to Dolabella. I send you
copies; not that I am in doubt whether to send the letters or not; for I
feel sure that they ought to be sent, and I have no doubt you will agree
with me.

Please, dear Atticus, supply my boy with as much money as you think fit,
and forgive me for troubling you. For what you have done already I am
most grateful. That unpublished book of mine[214] I have not yet
polished up as I should wish: the points you want me to introduce must
wait for a second volume. But I think—and I hope you will believe
me—that one could have spoken against that disreputable party with less
danger in the tyrant's

Footnote 214:

  Possibly his poem _De temporibus suis_; but it is not certain.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 266

partes vivo tyranno dici potuisse quam mortuo. Ille enim nescio quo
pacto ferebat me quidem mirabiliter; nunc, quacumque nos commovimus, ad
Caesaris non modo acta, verum etiam cogitata revocamur. De Montano,
quoniam Flamma venit, videbis. Puto rem meliore loco esse debere.


                        XVIIa (= _Fam._ IX. 14)

                    CICERO DOLABELLAE COS. SUO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Pompeiano V Non. Mai. a. 710_]

Etsi contentus eram, mi Dolabella, tua gloria, satisque ex ea magnam
laetitiam voluptatemque capiebam, tamen non possum non confiteri
cumulari me maximo gaudio, quod vulgo hominum opinio socium me ascribat
tuis laudibus. Neminem conveni (convenio autem cotidie plurimos. Sunt
enim permulti optimi viri, qui valetudinis causa in haec loca veniant;
praeterea ex municipiis frequentes necessarii mei), quin omnes, cum te
summis laudibus ad caelum extulerunt, mihi continue maximas gratias
agant. Negant enim se dubitare, quin tu meis praeceptis et consiliis
obtemperans praestantissimum te civem et singularem consulem praebeas.
Quibus ego quamquam verissime possum respondere te, quae facias, tuo
iudicio et tua sponte facere, nec cuiusquam egere consilio, tamen neque
plane adsentior, ne imminuam tuam laudem, si omnis a meis consiliis
profecta videatur, neque valde nego. Sum enim avidior etiam, quam satis
est, gloriae. Et tamen non alienum est dignitate tua,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 267

life than after his death. For he, somehow, was most patient with me;
now, whichever way we turn, we are reminded not only of Caesar's
enactments, but also of his intentions. Please see about Montanus, since
Flamma has arrived. I think the matter ought to be put on a better
footing.


                                 XVIIa

          CICERO TO HIS FRIEND DOLABELLA THE CONSUL, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Pompeii, May 3_, B.C. _44_]

Though I feel content with the glory you have won, my dear Dolabella,
and it affords me the greatest joy and pleasure, still I cannot help
confessing that the crowning point of my joy is, that in the popular
opinion my name is associated with yours in people's praise. I am daily
meeting many people; for quite a number of persons of consideration come
here for their health, besides many acquaintances of mine from the
country towns; and I have not met anyone who does not extol you to the
skies, and in the same breath offer me the sincerest congratulations.
For they say they have no doubt that it is by following my precepts and
advice that you are showing yourself a most distinguished citizen and an
excellent consul. Though I can answer them with the fullest truth that
what you do, you do acting on your own judgment and on your own
initiative and that you need no advice, still I do not entirely assent,
lest I should diminish your glory, if it all appears to have sprung from
my advice, nor do I quite deny it; for I have more than my proper share
of desire for glory. And yet it would not detract from your

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 268

quod ipsi Agamemnoni, regum regi, fuit honestum, habere aliquem in
consiliis capiendis Nestorem, mihi vero gloriosum te iuvenem consulem
florere laudibus quasi alumnum disciplinae meae. L. quidem Caesar, cum
ad eum aegrotum Neapolim venissem, quamquam erat oppressus totius
corporis doloribus, tamen, antequam me plane salutavit, "O mi Cicero,"
inquit, "gratulor tibi, cum tantum vales apud Dolabellam, quantum si ego
apud sororis filium valerem, iam salvi esse possemus. Dolabellae vero
tuo et gratulor et gratias ago; quem quidem post te consulem solum
possumus vere consulem dicere." Dein multa de facto ac de re gesta tua;
nihil magnificentius, nihil praeclarius actum umquam, nihil rei publicae
salutarius. Atque haec una vox omnium est. A te autem peto, ut me hanc
quasi falsam hereditatem alienae gloriae sinas cernere meque aliqua ex
parte in societatem tuarum laudum venire patiare. Quamquam, mi
Dolabella, (haec enim iocatus sum) libentius omnes meas, si modo sunt
aliquae meae laudes, ad te transfuderim quam aliquam partem exhauserim
ex tuis. Nam, cum te semper tantum dilexerim, quantum tu intellegere
potuisti, tum his tuis factis sic incensus sum, ut nihil umquam in amore
fuerit ardentius. Nihil est enim, mihi crede, virtute formosius, nihil
pulchrius, nihil amabilius. Semper amavi, ut scis, M. Brutum propter
eius summum ingenium, suavissimos mores, singularem probitatem atque
constantiam.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 269

dignity any more than it disgraced Agamemnon, the king of kings, to have
some Nestor to assist in your plans; while it would redound to my glory
that you with your brilliant reputation as a consul while still so young
should be thought a pupil of my training. Indeed L. Caesar, when I paid
him a visit on his sick bed at Naples, though he was racked with pains
all over his body, had hardly finished his first greeting before he
said: "My dear Cicero, I congratulate you on the influence you have with
Dolabella. If I had had as much with my sister's son,[215] we might have
been safe now. Dolabella himself I both congratulate and thank: indeed
he is the first consul since yourself who can really be called a
consul." Then he had much to say about the incident and your
achievement. No more splendid and magnificent deed was ever done, nor
any more salutary to the state: and that is what the whole world is
saying with one voice. I beg you to let me enter into this false
heritage of another's glory, and suffer me to share your praises in some
slight degree. However, my dear Dolabella, so far I have only been
joking, and, if I have any reputation myself, I would rather turn its
full stream upon you, than divert any part of yours upon myself. For,
though I have always been as fond of you as you must have realized, now
by your actions my fondness has been fanned into the most ardent love
that is possible. For, believe me, there is nothing fairer than virtue,
nothing more beautiful, nothing more loveable. I have always loved M.
Brutus, as you know, for his great ability, his most agreeable manners,
his extraordinary uprightness

Footnote 215:

  Julia, sister of L. Caesar, was mother of Antony by her first husband,
  Antonius Creticus.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 270

Tamen Idibus Martiis tantum accessit ad amorem, ut mirarer locum fuisse
augendi in eo, quod mihi iam pridem cumulatum etiam videbatur. Quis
erat, qui putaret ad eum amorem, quem erga te habebam, posse aliquid
accedere? Tantum accessit, ut mihi nunc denique amare videar, ante
dilexisse. Quare quid est, quod ego te horter, ut dignitati et gloriae
servias? Proponam tibi claros viros, quod facere solent, qui hortantur?
Neminem habeo clariorem quam te ipsum. Te imitere oportet, tecum ipse
certes. Ne licet quidem tibi iam tantis rebus gestis non tui similem
esse. Quod cum ita sit, hortatio non est necessaria, gratulatione magis
utendum est. Contigit enim tibi, quod haud scio an nemini, ut summa
severitas animadversionis non modo non invidiosa, sed etiam popularis
esset et cum bonis omnibus tum infimo cuique gratissima. Hoc si tibi
fortuna quadam contigisset, gratularer felicitati tuae, sed contigit
magnitudine cum animi tum etiam ingenii atque consilii. Legi enim
contionem tuam. Nihil illa sapientius. Ita pedetemptim et gradatim tum
accessus a te ad causam facti, tum recessus, ut res ipsa maturitatem
tibi animadvertendi omnium concessu daret. Liberasti igitur et urbem
periculo et civitatem metu, neque solum ad tempus maximam utilitatem
attulisti, sed etiam ad exemplum. Quo facto intellegere debes in te
positam esse rem publicam, tibique

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 271

and constancy. However on the Ides of March my affection was so enhanced
that I wondered there was any room for increase in what I had long
thought had reached its culminating point. Who would have thought that
there could be any increase in the affection I have for you? But there
has been such an increase that I seem to myself now to love, while
before I only liked. So what need is there that I should exhort you to
have a regard for your dignity and glory? Shall I do what people
generally do when exhorting others, set before your eyes distinguished
examples? There is none more distinguished than your own. You must
imitate yourself and vie with yourself. Indeed, after such an
achievement, you dare not fail to be like yourself. As that is so,
exhortation is unnecessary and congratulation is more in place. For you
have had the fortune, which I doubt if anyone else ever had, that great
severity in punishment should not only bring no ill will, but should be
popular and most pleasing to all, both of the upper and of the lower
class. If this had happened to you by a stroke of fortune, I should
congratulate you on your luck: but it has happened through your
greatness of heart, yes, and of ability and of prudence. For I have read
your harangue. Nothing could have been more skilful. You led up to the
case so gradually and gently, and then left it again, that by universal
consent the facts themselves showed it was high time to resort to
punitive measures. So you freed the city from danger and the state from
fear, and you performed a sound service not only to meet the emergency
but to serve as a precedent. After that you ought to understand that the
republic is in your hand, and

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 272

non modo tuendos, sed etiam ornandos illos viros, a quibus initium
libertatis profectum est. Sed his de rebus coram plura prope diem, ut
spero. Tu, quoniam rem publicam nosque conservas, fac, ut diligentissime
te ipsum, mi Dolabella, custodias.


                                 XVIII

                             CICERO ATTICO.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Pompeiano VII Id. Mai. a. 710_]

Saepius me iam agitas, quod rem gestam Dolabellae nimis in caelum videar
efferre. Ego autem, quamquam sane probo factum, tamen, ut tanto opere
laudarem, adductus sum tuis et unis et alteris litteris. Sed totum se a
te abalienavit Dolabella ea de causa, qua me quoque sibi inimicissimum
reddidit. O hominem impudentem! Kal. Ian. debuit, adhuc non solvit,
praesertim cum se maximo aere alieno Faberi manu liberarit et opem ab
Ope petierit. Licet enim iocari, ne me valde conturbatum putes. Atque
ego ad eum VIII Idus litteras dederam bene mane, eodem autem die tuas
litteras vesperi acceperam in Pompeiano sane celeriter tertio abs te
die. Sed, ut ad te eo ipso die scripseram, satis aculeatas ad Dolabellam
litteras dedi; quae si nihil profecerint, puto fore ut me praesentem non
sustineat.

Albianum te confecisse arbitror. De Patulciano

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 273

that you should not only protect but honour the men who paved the way
for freedom. But I hope we shall soon meet to discuss these things. Do
you, my dear Dolabella, take the greatest care of yourself, since you
preserve the state and all of us.


                                 XVIII

                           CICERO TO ATTICUS.

[Sidenote: _Pompeii, May 9_, B.C. _44_]

You are continually reproaching me now with lauding Dolabella to the
skies more than I ought. But, though I strongly approve of his action,
still it was one and then another letter of yours which induced me to
belaud it so highly. But Dolabella has entirely lost your good graces
for the same reason that he has made me too a bitter enemy. What a
shameless fellow! He has not paid yet, though he ought to have done so
on the first of January, especially as he has freed himself from
enormous debts by the handwriting of Faberius and has sought help from
the goddess of help.[216] For I must have my joke, that you may not
think I am seriously concerned. I had written too to him very early on
the 8th, and on the same day in the evening I got a letter from you at
Pompeii, delivered very quickly on the third day after you wrote it.
But, as I told you then, my letter to Dolabella was sufficiently
stinging. If it takes no effect, I don't think he will be able to face
me.

Footnote 216:

  Faberius was Caesar's secretary and was used by Antony to insert extra
  details in Caesar's memoranda. Here Dolabella is included in the
  accusation repeatedly brought by Cicero against Antony, that he used
  for his own purposes the large sum left by Caesar in the public
  treasury in the temple of Ops.

I think you have settled Albius' business. With

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 274

nomine, quod mihi suppetiatus es,[217] gratissimum est et simile tuorum
omnium. Sed ego Erotem ad ista expedienda factum mihi videbar
reliquisse; cuius non sine magna culpa vacillarunt. Sed cum ipso videro.

Footnote 217:

  suppetiatus es _Montagnanus_: suspendiatus est _MSS._

De Montano, ut saepe ad te scripsi, erit tibi tota res curae. Servius
proficiscens quod desperanter tecum locutus est, minime miror neque ei
quicquam in desperatione concedo. Brutus noster, singularis vir, si in
senatum non est Kal. Iuniis venturus, quid facturus sit in foro, nescio.
Sed hoc ipse melius. Ego ex iis, quae parari video, non multum Idibus
Martiis profectum iudico. Itaque de Graecia cotidie magis et magis
cogito. Nec enim Bruto meo, exsilium ut scribit ipse meditanti, video
quid prodesse possim. Leonidae me litterae non satis delectarunt. De
Herode tibi adsentior. Saufei legisse vellem. Ego ex Pompeiano VI Idus
Mai. cogitabam.


                                  XIX

                             CICERO ATTICO.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Pompeiano VIII Id. Mai. a. 710_]

Nonis Maiis cum essem in Pompeiano, accepi binas a te litteras, alteras
sexto die, alteras quarto. Ad superiores igitur prius. Quam mihi
iucundum opportune tibi Barnaeum litteras reddidisse!

Tu vero cum Cassio ut cetera. Quam commode autem, quod id ipsum, quod me
mones, quadriduo

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 275

regard to Patulcius' debt, it was most kind of you and just like
yourself to come to my aid. But I seem to have deserted Eros, who is
just the man to clear the matter up: it was through a grave fault of his
that it went wrong. But I will see to that with him.

Montanus' business, as I have often said, you must take charge of
entirely. I am not surprised that Servius spoke to you in a tone of
despair, when he was leaving; and my despair quite equals his. What our
friend Brutus is going to do in the Forum, incomparable hero though he
is, if he is not going to attend the Senate on the first of June, I do
not know. But he should know this better himself. From the things I see
in course of preparation I don't think the Ides of March are going to
help much. So I am daily thinking more and more of Greece. For I fail to
see what use I can be to Brutus, who, as he writes to me, is meditating
exile. Leonidas' letter did not give me much pleasure. I agree about
Herodes. I should like to have read Saufeius' note. I am thinking of
leaving Pompeii on the tenth of May.


                                  XIX

                           CICERO TO ATTICUS.

[Sidenote: _Pompeii, May 8_, B.C. _44_]

Here at Pompeii on the seventh of May I received two letters, one five
days old, the other three. So I will answer the earlier first. How glad
I am Barnaeus delivered the letter so opportunely!

Take Cassius in hand like everything else. It is however very lucky that
I had written to him

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 276

ante ad eum scripseram, exemplumque mearum litterarum ad te miseram!
Sed, cum ex Dolabellae aritia (sic enim tu ad me scripseras) magna
desperatione adfectus essem, ecce tibi et Bruti et tuae litterae! Ille
exsilium meditari. Nos autem alium portum propiorem huic aetati
videbamus; in quem mallem equidem pervehi florente Bruto nostro
constitutaque re publica. Sed nunc quidem, ut scribis, non utrumvis.
Adsentiris enim mihi nostram aetatem a castris, praesertim civilibus,
abhorrere.

Antonius ad me tantum de Clodio rescripsit, meam lenitatem et clementiam
et sibi esse gratam et mihi voluptati magnae fore. Sed Pansa furere
videtur de Clodio itemque de Deiotaro, et loquitur severe, si velis
credere. Illud tamen non belle, ut mihi quidem videtur, quod factum
Dolabellae vehementer improbat. De coronatis, cum sororis tuae filius a
patre accusatus esset, rescripsit se coronam habuisse honoris Caesaris
causa, posuisse luctus gratia; postremo se libenter vituperationem
subire, quod amaret etiam mortuum Caesarem.

Ad Dolabellam, quem ad modum tibi dicis placere, scripsi diligenter. Ego
etiam ad Siccam; tibi hoc oneris non impono. Nolo te illum iratum
habere. Servi orationem cognosce; in qua plus timoris video quam
consilii. Sed, quoniam perterriti omnes sumus, adsentior Servio.
Publilius tecum tricatus est. Huc enim Caerellia missa ab istis est
legata ad me; cui

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 277

four days ago, as you advise, and had sent a copy of my letter to you.
But when I was in the depths of despair owing to Dolabella's arice[218]
(for that is what you wrote), lo and behold your letter and Brutus'.
Brutus is meditating exile. I however see another haven and a readier
one for my age: but I would rather sail into it with Brutus in
prosperity and the republic set in order. But now, as you say, I have
not the choice. For you agree that age unfits me for a soldier's camp,
especially in civil war.

Footnote 218:

  Apparently a slip of the pen on the part of Atticus for _avaritia_,
  unless the text is corrupt.

Antony only answered about Clodius, that my leniency and clemency had
been very gratifying to him and would be a source of pleasure to myself.
But Pansa appears to be in a fury about Clodius and about Deiotarus too;
and, if you are willing to believe him, he expresses himself very
forcibly. But there is one thing that to my mind is shady, that he
strongly disapproves of Dolabella's action. As for the people who wore
garlands, when your nephew was reproved for it by his father, he
answered that he wore a garland for Caesar's honour, and laid it aside
for grief; and finally that he would willingly submit to reproaches for
loving Caesar even after his death.

To Dolabella I have written carefully, as you advise: and I have written
myself to Sicca too. I do not want to lay this burden on you, for I
don't want him to be angry with you. I recognise Servius' way of
talking; and there seems to me to be more fright than wisdom in it. But,
since we are all frightened, I agree with Servius. Publilius has been
hoaxing. For Caerellia was sent here by them as their ambassadress to
me;[219] but

Footnote 219:

  To persuade Cicero to remarry his divorced wife Publilia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 278

facile persuasi mihi id, quod rogaret, ne licere quidem, non modo non
lubere. Antonium si videro, accurate agam de Buthroto.

Venio ad recentiores litteras; quamquam de Servio iam rescripsi. "Me
facere magnam πρᾶξιν Dolabellae." Mihi mehercule ita videtur, non
potuisse maior tali re talique tempore. Sed tamen, quicquid ei tribuo,
tribuo ex tuis litteris. Tibi vero adsentior maiorem πρᾶξιν eius fore,
si mihi, quod debuit, dissolverit. Brutus velim sit Asturae. Quod autem
laudas me, quod nihil ante de profectione constituam, quam, ista quo
evasura sint, videro, muto sententiam. Neque quicquam tamen ante, quam
te videro. Atticam meam gratias mihi agere de matre gaudeo; cui quidem
ego totam villam cellamque tradidi eamque cogitabam V Idus videre. Tu
Atticae salutem dices. Nos Piliam diligenter tuebimur.


                                   XX

                             CICERO ATTICO.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano V Id. Mai. a. 710_]

E Pompeiano navi advectus sum in Luculli nostri hospitium VI Idus hora
fere tertia. Egressus autem e navi accepi tuas litteras, quas tuus
tabellarius in Cumanum attulisse dicebatur Nonis Maiis datas. A Lucullo
postridie eadem fere hora veni in Puteolanum. Ibi accepi duas epistulas,
alteram Nonis,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 279

I persuaded her easily that what she asked was not even lawful, besides
being repugnant to me. If I see Antony, I will do my best for Buthrotum.

I come to your more recent letter, though I have answered already about
Servius. You say I make much of Dolabella's score. Well, I don't see
that he could have made a greater one considering the times and
circumstances. However, all the credit I give him I give in accordance
with your letter. But I agree with you that it would be still better, if
he would pay off my score.[220] I hope Brutus will be at Astura. You
praise me for not making up my mind about leaving the country before I
see how things are going to turn out. I have changed my mind: however I
won't do anything until I see you. I am gratified at Attica's thanking
me for her mother. I have put the whole house and the store-rooms at her
service and I am thinking of seeing her on the 11th. Give Attica my
love. I will take great care of Pilia.

Footnote 220:

  There is a play on the double sense of πρᾶξις, (1) exploit, (2)
  exaction of money. The money in question was an instalment of Tullia's
  dowry, which Dolabella had to repay.


                                   XX

                           CICERO TO ATTICUS.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, May 11_, B.C. _44_]

From Pompeii I came by sea to enjoy our friend Lucullus' hospitality on
the 10th about nine o'clock in the morning. As I disembarked, I received
your letter, which your messenger says was taken to Cumae, dated the
7th. I left Lucullus and reached Puteoli about the same hour the next
day. There I received two letters, dated one the 7th the other

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 280

alteram VII Idus Lanuvio datas. Audi igitur ad omnes. Primum, quae de re
mea gesta et in solutione et in Albiano negotio, grata. De tuo autem
Buthroto, cum in Pompeiano essem, Misenum venit Antonius. Inde ante
discessit, quam illum venisse audissem in Samnium. A quo[221] vide quid
speres. Romae igitur de Buthroto. L. Antoni horribilis contio,
Dolabellae praeclara. Iam vel sibi habeat nummos, modo numeret Idibus.
Tertullae nollem abortum. Tam enim Cassii sunt iam quam Bruti serendi.
De regina velim atque etiam de Caesare filio. Persolvi primae epistulae,
venio ad secundam.

Footnote 221:

  a quo in Samnium _MSS._ _The words were transposed by Wesenberg._

De Quintis, Buthroto, cum venero, ut scribis. Quod Ciceroni suppeditas,
gratum. Quod errare me putas, qui rem publicam putem pendere e Bruto,
sic se res habet. Aut nulla erit aut ab isto istisve servabitur. Quod me
hortaris, ut scriptam contionem mittam, accipe a me, mi Attice,
καθολικὸν θεώρημα earum rerum, in quibus satis exercitati sumus. Nemo
umquam neque poëta neque orator fuit, qui quemquam meliorem quam se
arbitraretur. Hoc etiam malis contingit, quid tu Bruto putas et
ingenioso et erudito? De quo etiam experti sumus nuper in edicto.
Scripseram rogatu tuo. Meum mihi placebat, illi suum. Quin etiam, cum
ipsius precibus paene adductus

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 281

the 9th, from Lanuvium. So listen to my answer to them all. First, my
thanks for what you have done in my affairs both in payment and in the
business with Albius. Then with regard to your Buthrotum, when I was at
Pompeii, Antony came to Misenum: but he was gone again to Samnium,
before I heard he had come. See that you do not build much hope on him.
So I must see to Buthrotum at Rome. L. Antonius' speech is horrible,
Dolabella's splendid. Let him keep his money now, provided he pays on
the Ides. I am sorry about Tertulla's[222] miscarriage. For we want a
crop of Cassii as much as one of Bruti. I hope it is true about
Cleopatra and about Caesar's son[223] too. I have finished your first
letter, now I come to your second.

Footnote 222:

  An affectionate diminutive of the name of Tertia, half-sister of
  Brutus, and wife of Cassius.

Footnote 223:

  A child of Cleopatra, called Caesarion. Caesar denied the parentage.

The Quinti and Buthrotum we will leave till I come to Rome, as you say.
Thanks for supplying my son's needs. You think I am wrong in thinking
the republic hangs on Brutus: but it is a fact. There will be none, or
he and his party will save it. You exhort me to send a written speech.
You may take it from me, my dear Atticus, as a general axiom with regard
to those matters, in which I have sufficient experience, that no one,
whether poet or orator, ever thought anyone better than himself. This is
so even in the case of bad ones: and what do you think it will be in the
case of Brutus, who has talent and learning? Besides I have had
experience of him lately over the edict. I had written one at your
request. I liked mine, he liked his. Nay more, when I was induced by his
entreaties to dedicate to him my book

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 282

scripsissem ad eum "de optimo genere dicendi," non modo mihi, sed etiam
tibi scripsit sibi illud, quod mihi placeret, non probari. Quare sine,
quaeso, sibi quemque scribere.

                 "Suam quoique sponsam, mihi meam; suum
                      quoique amorem, mihi meum."

Non scite. Hoc enim Atilius, poëta durissimus. Atque utinam liceat isti
contionari! Cui si esse in urbe tuto licebit, vicimus. Ducem enim novi
belli civilis aut nemo sequetur, aut ii sequentur, qui facile vincantur.

Venio ad tertiam. Gratas fuisse meas litteras Bruto et Cassio gaudeo.
Itaque iis rescripsi. Quod Hirtium per me meliorem fieri volunt, do
equidem operam, et ille optime loquitur, sed vivit habitatque cum Balbo,
qui item bene loquitur. Quid credas, videris. Dolabellam valde placere
tibi video; mihi quidem egregie. Cum Pansa vixi in Pompeiano. Is plane
mihi probabat se bene sentire et cupere pacem. Causam armorum quaeri
plane video. Edictum Bruti et Cassi probo. Quod vis, ut suscipiam
cogitationem, quidnam istis agendum putem, consilia temporum sunt; quae
in horas commutari vides. Dolabellae et prima illa actio et haec contra
Antonium contio mihi profecisse permultum videtur. Prorsus ibat res;
nunc autem videmur habituri ducem; quod unum municipia bonique
desiderant. Epicuri mentionem facis et audes dicere μὴ πολιτεύεσθαι. Non
te Bruti

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 283

"on the best oratorical style," he wrote not only to me but to you also,
that what I found pleasing, he did not approve. So, pray, let every man
do his writing for himself. "To each his own wife; mine for me. To each
his own love; mine for me." It is not neatly put, for it is by Atilius,
the most wooden of poets. I only hope Brutus may be able to deliver a
speech. If he can enter the city in safety, we have won. For, as the
leader in a new civil war, no one will follow him, or at least only
those who can easily be conquered.

I come to your third letter. I am glad Brutus and Cassius were pleased
with my letter: so I have sent an answer. They want me to turn Hirtius
into a better citizen. I am doing my best, and his promises are fair
enough, but he spends all his days and nights with Balbus, whose
promises are fair enough too. How much of them you can believe, you must
see for yourself. I observe you are very well satisfied with Dolabella,
and I am more than satisfied. I saw a lot of Pansa at Pompeii: and he
quite convinced me that he was well inclined and desirous of peace. I
can see quite clearly that a pretext for war is being sought. The edict
of Brutus and Cassius I approve. You want me to consider what I think
they ought to do. One has to form one's plans according to
circumstances; and, as you see, they are changing every hour. I think
Dolabella's first move and this speech of his against Antony have both
done a lot of good. Things are certainly advancing: and now we seem to
be going to have a leader, which is the very thing the country towns and
the well affected want. You mention Epicurus and dare to say "take no
part in politics." Are you not

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 284

nostri vulticulus ab ista oratione deterret? Quintus filius, ut scribis,
Antoni est dextella. Per eum igitur, quod volemus, facile auferemus.
Exspecto, si, ut putas, L. Antonius produxit Octavium, qualis contio
fuerit.

Haec scripsi raptim. Statim enim Cassi tabellarius. Eram continuo Piliam
salutaturus, deinde ad epulas Vestori navicula. Atticae plurimam
salutem.


                                  XXI

                             CICERO ATTICO.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano V Id. Mai. a. 710_]

Cum paulo ante dedissem ad te Cassi tabellario litteras, V Idus venit
noster tabellarius, et quidem, portenti simile, sine tuis litteris. Sed
cito conieci Lanuvi te fuisse. Eros autem festinavit, ut ad me litterae
Dolabellae perferrentur non de re mea (nondum enim meas acceperat), sed
rescripsit ad eas, quarum exemplum tibi miseram, sane luculente. Ad me
autem, cum Cassi tabellarium dimisissem, statim Balbus. O dei boni, quam
facile perspiceres timere otium! Et nosti virum, quam tectus. Sed tamen
Antoni consilia narrabat; illum circumire veteranos, ut acta Caesaris
sancirent idque se facturos esse iurarent, ut castra[224] omnes
haberent, eaque duumviri omnibus mensibus inspicerent. Questus est etiam
de sua invidia, eaque omnis eius oratio fuit, ut amare videretur
Antonium. Quid quaeris? nihil sinceri.

Footnote 224:

  ut castra _Otto_: utram _M^1_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 285

frightened out of such talk by our friend Brutus' frown? Young Quintus,
you tell me, is Antony's right hand man. So we shall easily get what we
want through him. I am wondering what sort of speech Octavius made, if,
as you thought, L. Antonius introduced him to a public meeting.

I am writing in haste: for Cassius' letter carrier is starting at once.
I am going directly to call on Pilia, and then on to dinner with
Vestorius by boat. My best love to Attica.


                                  XXI

                           CICERO TO ATTICUS.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, May 11_, B.C. _44_]

Just after I had given Cassius' messenger a letter for you on the 11th,
came my messenger, and, to my extraordinary surprise, without a letter
from you. But I quickly conjectured you had been at Lanuvium. Eros
however had hastened to let me have a letter from Dolabella, not about
my debt (for he had not got my letter yet), but an answer, and a very
good answer too, to the one of which I sent you a copy. No sooner had I
got rid of Cassius' messenger than Balbus came to see me. Good God, how
easy it is to see that he is afraid of peace! And you know how secretive
the man is. Yet he told me Antony's plans. He is canvassing all the
veterans, asking them to support Caesar's acts and to take an oath to
that effect, to keep in camps, which are to be inspected every month by
two officials. He grumbled too about the prejudice against himself, and
everything he said seemed to show affection for Antony. In fact there is
no reliability in him. To me

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 286

Mihi autem non est dubium, quin res spectet ad castra. Acta enim illa
res est animo virili, consilio puerili. Quis enim hoc non vidit, regni
heredem relictum? Quid autem absurdius?

               "Hoc métuere, alterum ín metu non pónere!"

Quin etiam hoc ipso tempore multa ὑποσόλοικα. Ponti Neapolitanum a matre
tyrannoctoni possideri! Legendus mihi saepius est "Cato maior" ad te
missus. Amariorem enim me senectus facit. Stomachor omnia. Sed mihi
quidem βεβίωται; viderint iuvenes. Tu mea curabis, ut curas.

Haec scripsi seu dictavi apposita secunda mensa apud Vestorium.
Postridie apud Hirtium cogitabam et quidem πεντέλοιπον. Sic hominem
traducere ad optumates paro. Λῆρος πολύς. Nemo est istorum, qui otium
non timeat. Quare talaria videamus. Quidvis enim potius quam castra.

Atticae salutem plurimam velim dicas. Exspecto Octavi contionem et si
quid aliud, maxime autem, ecquid Dolabella tinniat an in meo nomine
tabulas novas fecerit.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 287

there seems no doubt that things are tending towards war. For the deed
was done with the courage of men, but with the blind policy of a child.
For who did not see that the tyrant left an heir? And what could be more
absurd than "to fear the one, and reck not of his friend"? Nay even now
there are many absurdities. Think of the mother of the tyrannicide[225]
occupying Pontius' house at Naples! I must keep on reading my _Cato
Major_ which is dedicated to you: for old age is beginning to make me
ill-tempered. Everything puts me in a rage. However, my life is over:
the young people must look out for themselves. Take care of my affairs
for me, as you are doing.

Footnote 225:

  Servilia, mother of Brutus.

This I have written or rather dictated when at dessert with Vestorius.
To-morrow I am thinking of paying a visit to Hirtius, the only survivor
of the band of five.[226] That is my way of trying to make him join the
conservative party. It is all nonsense: there is none of Caesar's party
who does not fear peace. So let us look for our sevenleague boots.
Anything is better than a camp.

Footnote 226:

  If this reading is correct, which is very doubtful, it probably refers
  to Hirtius, Pansa, Octavius, Lentulus Spinther and Philippus, who had
  been together at Puteoli.

Please pay my best respects to Attica. I am looking for Octavius' speech
and any other news there may be, but especially whether we shall hear
the ring of Dolabella's money or whether he repudiated his debts in my
case.[227]

Footnote 227:

  Referring to Dolabella's action as a tribune.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 288


                                  XXII

                             CICERO ATTICO.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano prid. Id. Mai. a. 710_]

Certior a Pilia factus mitti ad te Idibus tabellarios statim hoc nescio
quid exaravi. Primum igitur scire te volui me hinc Arpinum XVI Kalend.
Iun. Eo igitur mittes, si quid erit posthac; quamquam ipse iam iamque
adero. Cupio enim, antequam Romam venio, odorari diligentius, quid
futurum sit. Quamquam vereor, ne nihil coniectura aberrem. Minime enim
obscurum est, quid isti moliantur; meus vero discipulus, qui hodie apud
me cenat, valde amat illum, quem Brutus noster sauciavit. Et, si quaeris
(perspexi enim plane), timent otium; ὑπόθεσιν autem hanc habent eamque
prae se ferunt, clarissimum virum interfectum, totam rem publicam illius
interitu perturbatam, inrita fore, quae ille egisset, simul ac
desisteremus timere; clementiam illi malo fuisse; qua si usus non esset,
nihil ei tale accidere potuisse. Mihi autem venit in mentem, si Pompeius
cum exercitu firmo veniat, quod est εὔλογον, certe fore bellum. Haec me
species cogitatioque perturbat. Neque enim iam, quod tibi tum licuit,
nobis nunc licebit. Nam aperte laetati sumus. Deinde habent in ore nos
ingratos. Nullo modo licebit, quod tum et tibi licuit et multis.
Φαινοπροσωπητέον ergo et ἰτέον in castra?

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 289


                                  XXII

                           CICERO TO ATTICUS.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, May 14_, B.C. _44_]

As soon as I learned from Pilia that she was sending a messenger to you
on the 15th, I scrawled this bit of a note. First then I want you to
know that I am leaving here for Arpinum on May 17th. So, if you have
anything to send after that, you must send it there: though I shall be
in Rome almost directly. For I want to scent out as clearly as possible
what is going to happen before I come to town. However, I fear my
suspicions are not far from the truth. For it is clear enough what they
are doing. My pupil,[228] who dined with me to-day, is a warm admirer of
the man who was wounded by our Brutus: and, if you want to know, I see
quite clearly that they are afraid of peace. This is the theme on which
they are always dwelling: that a most distinguished person has been
killed, that by his death the whole state has been thrown into disorder;
that his acts will be null and void as soon as we have ceased to fear;
that his clemency was his destruction, and that, if he had not practised
clemency, such a thing could not have happened to him. I cannot help
thinking, then, that if Pompey comes with a strong force, which is quite
possible, there will certainly be war. When I picture this and think of
it, I am disturbed: for now we shall not have the choice you had before.
For we have shown our joy openly. Again they speak of us as ingrates.
What you and many others did then certainly will not be possible now.
Must I put in an appearance,

Footnote 228:

  Hirtius.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 290

Miliens mori melius, huic praesertim aetati. Itaque me Idus Martiae non
tam consolantur quam antea. Magnum enim mendum continent. Etsi illi
iuvenes

               ἄλλοις ἐν ἐσθλοῖς τόνδ' ἀπωθοῦνται ψόγον.

Sed, si tu melius quidpiam speras, quod et plura audis et interes
consiliis, scribas ad me velim simulque cogites, quid agendum nobis sit
super legatione votiva. Equidem in his locis moneor a multis, ne in
senatu Kalendis. Dicuntur enim occulte milites ad eam diem comparari et
quidem in istos, qui mihi videntur ubivis tutius quam in senatu fore.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 291

then, and join the army? A thousand times better to die, especially at
my time of life. So now I am not so much consoled as I was with the
thought of the Ides of March, for there was a grave mistake committed
then. However, those youths "in other noble deeds wipe out their
shame."[229] But, if you have any better hope, as you hear more news and
are in the midst of affairs, please write, and at the same time consider
what I ought to do about the votive legation. Here many people warn me
against attending the Senate on the 1st. They say troops are being
collected secretly for that occasion, and that too against your friends,
who to my idea will be safer anywhere than in the Senate.

Footnote 229:

  Attributed to Sophocles.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 292




                           M. TULLI CICERONIS
                         EPISTULARUM AD ATTICUM
                         LIBER QUINTUS DECIMUS


                                   I

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano XVI Kal. Iun. a. 710_]

O factum male de Alexione! Incredibile est, quanta me molestia
adfecerit, nec mehercule ex ea parte maxime, quod plerique mecum: "Ad
quem igitur te medicum conferes?" Quid mihi iam medico? Aut, si opus
est, tanta inopia est? Amorem erga me, humanitatem suavitatemque
desidero. Etiam illud. Quid est, quod non pertimescendum sit, cum
hominem temperantem, summum medicum tantus inproviso morbus oppresserit?
Sed ad haec omnia una consolatio est, quod ea condicione nati sumus, ut
nihil, quod homini accidere possit, recusare debeamus.

De Antonio iam antea tibi scripsi non esse eum a me conventum. Venit
enim Misenum, cum ego essem in Pompeiano. Inde ante profectus est, quam
ego eum venisse cognovi. Sed casu, cum legerem tuas litteras, Hirtius
erat apud me in Puteolano. Ei legi et egi. Primum quod attinet, nihil
mihi concedebat, deinde ad summam arbitrum me statuebat non modo huius
rei, sed totius consulatus sui. Cum Antonio autem sic agemus, ut
perspiciat, si in eo negotio

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 293




                            CICERO'S LETTERS
                               TO ATTICUS
                                BOOK XV


                                   I

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, May 17_, B.C. _44_]

What a misfortune about Alexio! It has upset me more than you can
believe, and not, I assure you, particularly on the score which most
people seem to think it has, asking to what doctor I shall turn now.
What do I want with a doctor now? And, if I do want one, is there such a
dearth of them? It is his love for me, his kindness and charming manner
that I miss. There is another thing, too. What have we not to fear, when
so temperate a person and so skilful a physician can be overcome
suddenly by such a disease? But for all these things there is one
consolation: we are born under this condition, that we may not refuse
anything that fate has in store for mortals.

As for Antony, I have told you before that I have not met him. For he
came to Misenum when I was at Pompeii, and he left before I knew he was
there. But by chance, when I was reading your letter, Hirtius was with
me at Puteoli. I read it to him and pleaded with him. At first he would
not make any concession worth counting, but in the end he said I should
direct not only this matter but all his consulship. With Antony I shall
put the matter so that he may see that, if he obliges me in this
particular

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 294

nobis satis fecerit, totum me futurum suum. Dolabellam spero domi esse.

Redeamus ad nostros. De quibus tu bonam spem te significas habere
propter edictorum humanitatem. Ego autem perspexi, cum a me XVII Kal. de
Puteolano Neapolim Pansae conveniendi causa proficisceretur Hirtius,
omnem eius sensum. Seduxi enim et ad pacem sum cohortatus. Non poterat
scilicet negare se velle pacem, sed non minus se nostrorum arma timere
quam Antoni, et tamen utrosque non sine causa praesidium habere, se
autem utraque arma metuere. Quid quaeris? οὐδὲν ὑγιές.

De Quinto filio tibi adsentior. Patri quidem certe gratissimae bellae
tuae litterae fuerunt. Caerelliae vero facile satis feci; nec valde
laborare mihi visa est, et, si illa, ego certe non laborarem. Istam
vero, quam tibi molestam scribis esse, auditam a te esse omnino demiror.
Nam, quod eam conlaudavi apud amicos audientibus tribus filiis eius et
filia tua, τί ἐκ τούτου;[230]

Footnote 230:

  τὸ ἐκ τούτου quid est hoc _MSS._ _The Latin words were excluded by
  Lambinus_, τί _suggested by Kayser_.

             "Quid est autem, cur ego personatus ambulem?"

Parumne foeda persona est ipsius senectutis?

Quod Brutus rogat, ut ante Kalendas, ad me quoque scripsit, et fortasse
faciam. Sed plane, quid velit, nescio. Quid enim illi adferre consilii
possum, cum ipse egeam consilio, et cum ille suae inmortalitati melius
quam nostro otio consuluerit? De regina rumor exstinguitur. De Flamma,
obsecro te, si quid potes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 295

matter, I shall be entirely his for the future. I hope Dolabella is at
home.

Let us return to our heroes. You hint that you have good hopes for them
in the moderate tone of the edicts. But, when Hirtius left me at Puteoli
on the 16th of May to meet Pansa at Naples, his whole mind was revealed
to me. For I took him aside and exhorted him to keep the peace. He could
not, of course, say that he did not want peace, but he did say that he
was as much afraid of armed action on our side as from Antony, and that
after all both had reason for being on their guard, and for his part he
was afraid of hostilities from both. In fact he is quite unreliable.

About young Quintus I agree with you. His father, at any rate, was most
pleased with your nice letter. Caerellia I easily satisfied; she did not
seem to me to bother herself much, and, if she had, I certainly should
not have done so. As to the lady who you say is plaguing you, I wonder
you listened to her at all. For, if I did compliment her before friends,
when three of her own sons and your daughter were present, what is there
in that?

             "Why should I wear a mask before men's eyes?"

Is not old age itself a mask ugly enough?

You say Brutus asks me to come before the 1st. He has written to me too,
and perhaps I shall do so. But I really don't know what he wants. What
advice can I give him, when I want advice myself, and when he has
thought of his immortality rather than our peace of mind? The rumour
about Cleopatra is dying out. As to Flamma, pray do what you can.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 296


                                   Ia

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Sinuessano XV Kal. Iun. a. 710_]

Here dederam ad te litteras exiens e Puteolano deverteramque in Cumanum.
Ibi bene valentem videram Piliam. Quin etiam paulo post Cumis eam vidi.
Venerat enim in funus; cui funeri ego quoque operam dedi. Cn. Lucullus,
familiaris noster, matrem efferebat. Mansi igitur eo die in Sinuessano
atque inde mane postridie Arpinum proficiscens hanc epistulam exaravi.
Erat autem nihil novi, quod aut scriberem aut ex te quaererem, nisi
forte hoc ad rem putas pertinere. Brutus noster misit ad me orationem
suam habitam in contione Capitolina, petivitque a me, ut eam ne
ambitiose corrigerem, antequam ederet. Est autem oratio scripta
elegantissime sententiis, verbis, ut nihil possit ultra. Ego tamen, si
illam causam habuissem, scripsissem ardentius. Ὑπόθεσις vides quae sit
et persona dicentis. Itaque eam corrigere non potui. Quo enim in genere
Brutus noster esse vult et quod iudicium habet de optimo genere dicendi,
id ita consecutus in ea oratione est, ut elegantius esse nihil possit;
sed ego secutus aliud sum, sive hoc recte sive non recte. Tu tamen velim
eam orationem legas, nisi forte iam legisti, certioremque me facias,
quid iudices ipse. Quamquam vereor, ne cognomine tuo lapsus ὑπεραττικὸς
sis in iudicando. Sed, si recordabere Δημοσθένους fulmina, tum
intelleges

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 297


                                   Ia

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Sinuessa, May 18_, B.C. _44_]

Yesterday I sent off a letter to you as I was leaving Puteoli and
stopped at my house at Cumae. There I found Pilia enjoying the best of
health. Indeed, I saw her again shortly afterwards at Cumae. For she had
come for a funeral, which I also was attending. Our friend Cn. Lucullus
was burying his mother. So I stayed that day at Sinuessa, and there I
have scribbled this as I am starting early in the morning of the next
day for Arpinum. However, I have no news either to write to you or to
ask from you, unless you think this is to the point. Brutus has sent me
the speech he delivered in the meeting on the Capitol, and has asked me
to correct it without regarding his feelings, before he publishes it.
Now the speech is most elegantly expressed as regards its sentiments,
and its language could not be surpassed. But myself, if I had pleaded
that cause, I should have written with more fire. You realize what the
theme is and what the speaker is. So I could not alter it. For
considering the style our friend Brutus affects and the opinion he holds
of the best style of oratory, he has attained it in its highest elegance
in this speech. But rightly or wrongly I have aimed at something
different. However, I should like you to read the speech, if you have
not done so already, and to let me know your opinion, though I am afraid
that your name will lead you astray and you will be hyper-Attic in your
criticism. However, if you will recall Demosthenes' thunder-bursts, you
will be able to realize that one can use considerable force even in

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 298

posse vel ἀττικώτατα gravissime dici. Sed haec coram. Nunc nec sine
epistula nec cum inani epistula volui ad te Metrodorum venire.


                                   II

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Vesciano XV Kal. Iun. a. 710_]

XV Kal. e Sinuessano proficiscens cum dedissem ad te litteras
devertissemque acutius,[231] in Vesciano accepi a tabellario tuas
litteras; in quibus nimis multa de Buthroto. Non enim tibi ea res maiori
curae aut est aut erit quam mihi. Sic enim decet te mea curare, tua me.
Quam ob rem id quidem sic susceptum est mihi, ut nihil sim habiturus
antiquius.

Footnote 231:

  acutius _is probably a corruption of_ ad _and a proper name_.

L. Antonium contionatum esse cognovi tuis litteris et aliis sordide;
sed, id quale fuerit, nescio; nihil enim scripsisti. De Menedemo probe.
Quintus certe ea dictitat, quae scribis. Consilium meum a te probari,
quod ea non scribam, quae tu a me postularis, facile patior, multoque
magis id probabis, si orationem eam, de qua hodie ad te scripsi,
legeris. Quae de legionibus scribis, ea vera sunt. Sed non satis hoc
mihi videris tibi persuasisse, qui de Buthrotiis nostris per senatum
speres confici posse. Quod puto (tantum enim video) non videmur esse
victuri, sed, ut iam nos hoc fallat, de Buthroto te non fallet. De
Octavi contione idem sentio quod tu, ludorumque

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 299

the purest Attic style. But of this when we meet. At the present time
all I wanted was that Metrodorus should not come to you without a letter
or with a letter that had nothing in it.


                                   II

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Vescia, May 18_, B.C. _44_]

On the 18th I sent a letter to you as I was starting from Sinuessa, and
stopped at.... Then at Vescia your messenger delivered your letter,
which contained more than enough about Buthrotum. For you cannot and
will not have that business at heart more than I have and shall have:
that is the way that I ought to care for your business, and you for
mine. Accordingly, as I have undertaken it, I shall give it the
preference to everything else.

I hear from your letters and others that L. Antonius' speech was a poor
thing; but what it was like I do not know, as you have not told me. I am
glad to hear about Menedemus. Quintus certainly keeps on reiterating
what you mention. I am relieved to hear that you approve of my
determination not to write the sort of thing you asked me to write, and
you will approve of it much more, if you read the speech about which I
am writing to you to-day. What you say about the legions is true. But
you do not seem to me to have taken the point sufficiently to heart, if
you hope we can settle the matter of Buthrotum through the Senate. In my
opinion (for so much I can see) we have no chance of winning; but
supposing I am mistaken about that, you will not be disappointed about
Buthrotum. About Octavius' speech I think the same as you, and I don't
like

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 300

eius apparatus et Matius ac Postumus mihi procuratores non placent;
Saserna collega dignus. Sed isti omnes, quem ad modum sentis, non minus
otium timent quam nos arma. Balbum levari invidia per nos velim, sed ne
ipse quidem id fieri posse confidit. Itaque alia cogitat.

Quod prima disputatio Tusculana te confirmat, sane gaudeo; neque enim
ullum est perfugium aut melius aut paratius. Flamma quod bene loquitur,
non moleste fero. Tyndaritanorum causa, de qua causa laborat, quae sit,
ignoro. Hos tamen ...[232] Πεντέλοιπον movere ista videntur, in primis
erogatio pecuniae. De Alexione doleo, sed, quoniam inciderat in tam
gravem morbum, bene actum cum illo arbitror. Quos tamen secundos
heredes, scire velim et diem testamenti.

Footnote 232:

  hos tamen _MSS._, _which may be an aposiopesis, or some such word as_
  defendam _may be omitted_: noscum tamen _Reid_.


                                  III

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati XI Kal. Iun. a. 710_]

Undecimo Kal. accepi in Arpinati duas epistulas tuas, quibus duabus meis
respondisti. Una erat XV Kal., altera XII data. Ad superiorem igitur
prius. Accurres in Tusculanum, ut scribis; quo me VI Kal. venturum
arbitrabar. Quod scribis parendum victoribus, non mihi quidem, cui sunt
multa potiora.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 301

his preparations for the games or Matius and Postumus as his agents.
Saserna is a colleague worthy of them. But all that party, as you
realize, fear peace no less than we fear war. I should be glad if we
could relieve Balbus of his unpopularity; but even he has no hope of
that happening, so he is thinking of other things.

I am very glad if the first _Tusculan Disputation_ gives you courage,
for there is no other refuge either better or more available.[233] I am
relieved that Flamma gives a good account of himself. What the case of
the people of Tyndaris is, about which he is concerned, I do not know,
but I am on their side. The "last of the five" seems to be upset by the
things you wot of, especially the withdrawal of the money. I am grieved
about Alexio, but, as he had contracted such a serious disease, I think
he was fortunate. Whom he has appointed residuary heirs I should like to
know, and the latest day for acceptance of the inheritance under his
will.

Footnote 233:

  _i.e._ than death, which is the subject of the book mentioned.


                                  III

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, May 22_, B.C. _44_]

On the 22nd I received two letters from you at Arpinum, in which you
answered two of mine. One was dated the 18th, the other the 21st. So I
will answer the earlier first. Pray hasten to Tusculum, as you say: I
think I shall get there on the 27th. You say we must obey the victors.
I, for one, will not: there are many courses I should prefer to that.
For

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 302

Nam illa quae recordaris Lentulo et Marcello consulibus acta in aede
Apollinis, nec causa eadem est nec simile tempus, praesertim cum
Marcellum scribas aliosque discedere. Erit igitur nobis coram odorandum,
et constituendum, tutone Romae esse possimus. Novi conventus habitatores
sane movent; in magnis enim versamur angustiis. Sed sunt ista parvi;
quin vel maiora contemnimus. Calvae testamentum cognovi, hominis turpis
ac sordidi. Tabula Demonici quod tibi curae est, gratum. De malo[234]
scripsi iam pridem ad Dolabellam accuratissime, modo redditae litterae
sint. Eius causa et cupio et debeo.

Footnote 234:

  _For_ malo _many suggestions have been made: e.g._ Mario _by Manutius
  and_ Manlio _by Shuckburgh, who compares Att._ XIII. 9.

Venio ad propiorem. Cognovi de Alexione, quae desiderabam. Hirtius est
tuus. Antonio, quoniam[235] est, volo peius esse. De Quinto filio, ut
scribis, ἅλις.[236] De patre coram agemus. Brutum omni re, qua possum,
cupio iuvare. Cuius de oratiuncula idem te quod me sentire video. Sed
parum intellego, quid me velis scribere quasi a Bruto habita oratione,
cum ille ediderit. Qui tandem convenit? an sic ut in tyrannum iure
optimo caesum? Multa dicentur, multa scribentur a nobis, sed alio modo
et tempore. De sella Caesaris bene tribuni; praeclaros etiam XIV
ordines! Brutum apud me fuisse gaudeo, modo et libenter fuerit et sat
diu.

Footnote 235:

  quam iam _Orelli_: quoniam male _Alanus_. Tyrrell suggests that _male_
  can be supplied in thought from the _peius_ that follows.

Footnote 236:

  ἅλις _Turnebus_: A.M.C. _MSS._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 303

the case is not the same, nor is the occasion the same, as in the
proceedings which you recall to my memory as taking place in the temple
of Apollo in the consulship of Lentulus and Marcellus:[237] especially
as you say Marcellus and others are leaving Rome. So when we meet we
must scent out the facts and settle whether we can be safe at Rome. The
inhabitants of the new community[238] trouble me a good deal, for I am
in considerable difficulties. But these are small matters: I am treating
even more important things than this with contempt. I know Calva's will.
How disgracefully mean! I am grateful to you for attending to Demonicus'
sale. About ... I wrote to Dolabella long ago very fully, if only my
letter was delivered. In his interests I am keen and devoted.

Footnote 237:

  49 B.C., when the Senate summoned all good citizens to Rome.

Footnote 238:

  A _colonia_ of veterans planted by Antony at Casilinum.

I come to your more recent letter. I have learned all I want about
Alexio. Hirtius is devoted to you. With Antonius I wish things were
going even worse than they are. About young Quintus, as you say,
_assez_. About his father we will speak when we meet. I want to assist
Brutus in every way that is possible. I see you have the same opinion of
his harangue as I have. But I don't quite understand why you want me to
write a speech attributing it to Brutus, when he has published his own.
How could that be proper? Should I write as though against a tyrant
justly executed? I shall have much to say and much to write, but in
another way and at another time. Well done the tribunes about Caesar's
chair, and well done the famous fourteen rows of equites! I am glad
Brutus stayed at my house, and I only hope he enjoyed himself and stayed
a long time.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 304


                                   IV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati IX K. Iun. a. 710_]

IX K.H. X fere a Q. Fufio venit tabellarius. Nescio quid ab eo
litterularum, uti me sibi restituerem. Sane insulse, ut solet, nisi
forte, quae non ames, omnia videntur insulse fieri. Scripsi ita, ut te
probaturum existimo. Mihi duas a te epistulas reddidit, unam XI, alteram
X. Ad recentiorem prius et pleniorem. Laudo; si vero etiam Carfulenus,
"ἄνω ποταμῶν." Antoni consilia narras turbulenta. Atque utinam potius
per populum agat quam per senatum! quod quidem ita credo. Sed mihi totum
eius consilium ad bellum spectare videtur, si quidem D. Bruto provincia
eripitur. Quoquo modo ego de illius nervis existimo, non videtur fieri
posse sine bello. Sed non cupio, quoniam cavetur Buthrotiis. Rides? At
ego doleo non mea potius adsiduitate, diligentia, gratia perfici. Quod
scribis te nescire, quid nostris faciendum sit, iam pridem me illa
ἀπορία sollicitat. Itaque stulta iam Iduum Martiarum est consolatio.
Animis enim usi sumus virilibus, consiliis, mihi crede, puerilibus.
Excisa enim est arbor, non evulsa. Itaque quam fruticetur, vides.
Redeamus igitur, quoniam

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 305


                                   IV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, May 24_, B.C. _44_]

On the 24th, about four o'clock, came a messenger from Q. Fufius
bringing some sort of a note from him, begging me to make it up with
him. A very silly letter as usual, unless one thinks that everything one
does not like is very silly. I sent an answer of which I think you would
approve. The messenger delivered two of your letters, one of the 22nd,
the other of the 23rd. I answer the later and fuller one first. I
approve.[239] Why, if even Carfulenus deserts him, it will be the end of
the world[240] for him. Antony's plans, as you describe them, are
revolutionary. And I only hope he will try to get his way through the
people and not through the Senate, which I think is probable. But to me
his whole policy seems to point to war, since D. Brutus is being robbed
of his province. Whatever I may think of Brutus' resources, I don't
think that can happen without war. But I don't want war, since the
Buthrotians are all right as it is. You may smile: but I am sorry it was
not rather accomplished by my persistence, diligence, and influence. You
say you don't know what our friends are to do: that difficulty has been
bothering me for a long time. So now I see it was folly to be consoled
by the Ides of March: for though our courage was that of men, believe me
we had no more sense than children. We have only cut down the tree, not
rooted it up. So you see how it is shooting out.

Footnote 239:

  Presumably of the action of the Martian legion, which was reported to
  have deserted Antony and joined Octavius. Carfulenus, mentioned in the
  next sentence, was an officer in that legion.

Footnote 240:

  A quotation from Euripides, _Medea_, 409:—

                   ἄνω ποταμῶν ἱερῶν χωροῦσι παγαί,
                   καὶ δίκα καὶ πάντα πάλιν στρέφεται,

  which had apparently passed into a proverb.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 306

saepe usurpas, ad Tusculanas disputationes. Saufeium de te celemus; ego
numquam indicabo. Quod te a Bruto scribis, ut certior fieret, quo die in
Tusculanum essem venturus, ut ad te ante scripsi, VI Kal., et quidem ibi
te quam primum per videre velim. Puto enim nobis Lanuvium eundum et
quidem non sine multo sermone. Sed μελήσει.

Redeo ad superiorem. Ex qua praetereo illa prima de Buthrotiis; quae
mihi sunt inclusa medullis, sit modo, ut scribis, locus agendi. De
oratione Bruti prorsus contendis, cum iterum tam multis verbis agis.
Egone ut eam causam, quam is scripsit? ego scribam non rogatus ab eo?
Nulla παρεγχείρησις fieri potest contumeliosior. "At," inquis,
"Ἡρακλείδειον aliquod." Non recuso id quidem, sed et componendum
argumentum est et scribendi exspectandum tempus maturius. Licet enim de
me, ut libet, existimes (velim quidem quam optime), si haec ita manant,
ut videntur (feres, quod dicam), me Idus Martiae non delectant. Ille
enim numquam revertisset, nos timor confirmare eius acta non coëgisset,
aut, ut in Saufei eam relinquamque Tusculanas disputationes, ad quas tu
etiam Vestorium hortaris, ita gratiosi eramus apud illum, quem di
mortuum perduint! ut nostrae aetati,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 307

Let us return, then, to the _Tusculan Disputations_, since you often
refer to them. Let us keep your secret from Saufeius:[241] I will never
betray it. You send a message from Brutus, asking me to let him know
when I shall reach Tusculum. On the 27th, as I told you before; and I
should very much like to see you there as soon as possible. For I think
we shall have to go to Lanuvium,[242] and that not without a lot of
talk. However, I will see to it.

Footnote 241:

  Atticus and Saufeius both professed the Epicurean philosophy, which
  was attacked in the first book of the _Tusculan Disputations_. The
  "secret" is Atticus' lapse from Epicureanism in approving of the views
  expressed in that book.

Footnote 242:

  To meet Brutus.

I return to your earlier letter, and I pass over the first part about
the Buthrotians. For that is engraved on my heart of hearts, if only, as
you say, there is an opening for action. You are very insistent about
Brutus' speech, since you say so much about it again. Am I really to
plead the same case as that he has written about? Am I to write without
being asked by him? One could not put one's oar in more rudely. "But,"
you say, "write something in the style of Heracleides."[243] That I
don't refuse, but I should have to settle on a line of argument, and I
should have to wait for more time to write it. For think what you will
of me—though of course I should like you to think as well as possible,
and not be offended at what I say—if affairs drift on as they seem to be
doing, I can take no pleasure in the Ides of March. Caesar would never
have come back,[244] and fear would not have compelled us to ratify his
acts; or, if I join Saufeius' school and desert the _Tusculan
Disputations_, which you would press even on Vestorius, I was so high in
his favour (heaven confound him, though he is dead!) that to a person of
my age he was not a

Footnote 243:

  Heracleides of Pontus, a pupil of Plato, who wrote on political
  subjects.

Footnote 244:

  From the Parthian war, in all probability; though some take it to
  refer to Antony, as a reincarnation of Caesar.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 308

quoniam interfecto domino liberi non sumus, non fuerit dominus ille
fugiendus. Rubeo, mihi crede, sed iam scripseram; delere nolui.

De Menedemo vellem verum fuisset, de regina velim verum sit. Cetera
coram, et maxime quid nostris faciendum sit, quid etiam nobis, si
Antonius militibus obsessurus est senatum. Hanc epistulam si illius
tabellario dedissem, veritus sum, ne solveret. Itaque misi dedita. Erat
enim rescribendum tuis.


                                  IVa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. In Tusculano VI K. Iun. a. 710_]

Quam vellem Bruto studium tuum navare potuisses! Ego igitur ad eum
litteras. Ad Dolabellam Tironem misi cum mandatis et litteris. Eum ad te
vocabis et, si quid habebis, quod placeat, scribes. Ecce autem de
traverso L. Caesar ut veniam ad se rogat in Nemus aut scribam, quo se
venire velim; Bruto enim placere se a me conveniri. O rem odiosam et
inexplicabilem! Puto me ergo iturum et inde Romam, nisi quid mutaro.
Summatim adhuc ad te; nihildum enim a Balbo. Tuas igitur exspecto nec
actorum solum, sed etiam futurorum.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 309

master to run away from, since the death of a master has not set us
free. I blush, believe me; but I have written it, and I won't erase it.

I wish it had been true about Menedemus, and I hope it may be true about
Cleopatra. The rest when we meet, and especially what our friends must
do, and what even we must do, if Antony is going to surround the House
with soldiers. I was afraid he might open this letter, if I gave it to
his messengers, so I have sent it with special care, for I had to answer
yours.


                                  IVa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 27_, B.C. _44_]

How I wish you could have rendered your service to Brutus! So I am
writing to him. I have sent Tiro to Dolabella with a message and a
letter. Summon him to you, and, if you have any pleasant news, write.
But here is a letter from L. Caesar all of a sudden, asking me to come
to him at the Grove[245] or write where I should like to meet him:
Brutus wants me to see him. What a nuisance and what a surprise! I
suppose then I must go, and from there on to Rome, unless I change my
mind. At present I am only sending you a short note, for I have not
heard yet from Balbus. So I am looking for a letter from you to tell me
not only what has happened but what is going to happen.

Footnote 245:

  The Nemus Dianae at Aricia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 310


                                   V

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano V K. Iun. a. 710_]

A Bruto tabellarius rediit; attulit et ab eo et a Cassio. Consilium meum
magno opere exquirunt, Brutus quidem, utrum de duobus. O rem miseram!
plane non habeo, quid scribam. Itaque silentio puto me usurum, nisi quid
aliud tibi videtur; sin tibi quid venit in mentem, scribe, quaeso.
Cassius vero vehementer orat ac petit, ut Hirtium quam optimum faciam.
Sanum putas? ὁ θησαυρὸς ἄνθρακες.[246] Epistulam tibi misi.

Footnote 246:

  ὁ θησαυρὸς ἄνθρακες _Vict._: ΟΤΕΝΑΥϹΔΝΘΡΔΚΕϹ _M_.

Ut tu de provincia Bruti et Cassi per senatus consultum, ita scribit et
Balbus et Oppius. Hirtius quidem se afuturum (etenim iam in Tusculano
est) mihique, ut absim, vehementer auctor est, et ille quidem periculi
causa, quod sibi etiam fuisse dicit, ego autem, etiam ut nullum
periculum sit, tantum abest, ut Antoni suspicionem fugere nunc curem, ne
videar eius secundis rebus non delectari, ut mihi causa ea sit, cur
Romam venire nolim, ne illum videam. Varro autem noster ad me epistulam
misit sibi a nescio quo missam (nomen enim delerat); in qua scriptum
erat veteranos eos, qui reiciantur (nam partem esse dimissam),
improbissime loqui, ut magno periculo Romae sint futuri, qui ab eorum
partibus dissentire videantur. Quis porro noster itus, reditus, vultus,
incessus inter istos? Quodsi, ut scribis,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 311


                                   V

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 28_, B.C. _44_]

My messenger has returned from Brutus, bringing a letter from him and
from Cassius too. They want my advice badly, and Brutus asks which of
two courses he ought to pursue. Alas! I have not the remotest idea what
to say. So I think I shall keep silent, unless you think I must not. If
anything occurs to you, please write. Cassius, indeed, begs and
beseeches me to make Hirtius as sound as possible. Do you think he is in
his senses? It's fairy gold![247] I am sending his letter.

Footnote 247:

  Lit. "the treasure is ashes," a proverbial expression for
  disappointment; cf. Lucian, _Zeuxis_, 2: _Timon_, 41.

Balbus and Oppius tell me the same as you about the province to be
assigned by the Senate to Brutus and Cassius, and Hirtius says he will
not attend—he is here at Tusculum—and he strongly advises me to keep
away. He does so on the strength of the danger which he says there has
been even for him; but, even if there be no danger, I am so far from
caring to avoid giving Antony a suspicion that I do not rejoice in his
prosperity, that the very reason why I would rather not go to Rome is to
avoid seeing him. But our friend Varro has sent me a letter from
somebody or other—I don't know who, as he has erased the name—telling
him that the veterans whose claims have been put off (for some of them
have been disbanded) are using most criminal language, saying that those
who seem not to favour their claims will be in great danger at Rome.
What, I should like to know, can our goings and comings, our looks and
our demeanour, be among them? If again, as you say,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 312

L. Antonius in D. Brutum, reliqui in nostros, ego quid faciam aut quo me
pacto geram? Mihi vero deliberatum est, ut nunc quidem est, abesse ex ea
urbe, in qua non modo florui cum summa, verum etiam servivi cum aliqua
dignitate; nec tam statui ex Italia exire, de quo tecum deliberabo, quam
istuc non venire.


                                   VI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. In Tusculano VI K. Iun. vesperi a. 710_]

Cum ad me Brutus noster scripsisset et Cassius, ut Hirtium, qui adhuc
bonus fuisset (sciebam neque eum confidebam fore) mea auctoritate
meliorem facerem (Antonio est enim fortasse iratior, causae vero
amicissimus), tamen ad eum scripsi eique dignitatem Bruti et Cassi
commendavi. Ille quid mihi rescripsisset, scire te volui, si forte idem
tu quod ego existimares, istos etiam nunc vereri, ne forte ipsi nostri
plus animi habeant quam habent.

                       "HIRTIUS CICERONI SUO SAL.

"Rurene iam redierim, quaeris. An ego, cum omnes caleant, ignaviter
aliquid faciam? Etiam ex urbe sum profectus, utilius enim statui abesse.
Has tibi litteras exiens in Tusculanum scripsi. Noli autem me tam
strenuum putare, ut ad Nonas recurram. Nihil enim iam video opus esse
nostra cura, quoniam

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 313

L. Antonius is attacking D. Brutus, and the others attacking our
friends, what am I to do and how am I to bear myself? As things are now
I have made up my mind to keep away from a city in which I have not only
been distinguished in the highest position, but have even maintained
some position in servitude. I have not quite made up my mind to leave
Italy, a question which I will discuss with you, so much as not to go to
Rome.


                                   VI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 27_, B.C. _44_]

Our friend Brutus and Cassius had written to me to use my authority to
improve Hirtius' patriotism, since he had at present shown some (I knew
he had, but I doubted if he would continue, for, although he is a little
annoyed with Antony, he is very much devoted to the cause); in spite of
my doubts I wrote to him and commended to his care the maintenance of
Brutus' and Cassius' position. What his answer was I want you to know,
to see whether you think the same as I do, that the Caesarians are even
now afraid our friends have more courage than they really have.

                "HIRTIUS TO HIS FRIEND CICERO, GREETING.

"You ask if I have returned from the country. Can I play the laggard,
when all the world is so excited? In fact I have just left the city, for
I thought my absence would be more useful than my presence. This letter
I have written as I set out for Tusculum. Don't think I shall do
anything so energetic as to hurry back for the 5th. I see no need for my
protecting anyone, since proper precautions

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 314

praesidia sunt in tot annos provisa. Brutus et Cassius utinam, quam
facile a te de me impetrare possunt, ita per te exorentur, ne quod
calidius ineant consilium! Cedentes enim haec ais scripsisse—quo aut
quare? Retine, obsecro te, Cicero, illos, et noli sinere haec omnia
perire, quae funditus medius fidius rapinis, incendiis, caedibus
pervertuntur. Tantum, si quid timent, caveant, nihil praeterea
moliantur. Non medius fidius acerrimis consiliis plus quam etiam
inertissimis, dum modo diligentibus, consequentur. Haec enim, quae
fluunt, per se diuturna non sunt; in contentione praesentes ad nocendum
habent vires. Quid speres de illis, in Tusculanum ad me scribe."

Habes Hirti epistulam. Cui rescripsi nil illos calidius cogitare idque
confirmavi. Hoc, qualecumque esset, te scire volui.

Obsignata iam Balbus ad me Serviliam redisse, confirmare non
discessuros. Nunc exspecto a te litteras.


                                  VII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. In Tusculano V aut IV K. Iun. a. 710_]

Gratum, quod mihi epistulas; quae quidem me delectarunt, in primis Sexti
nostri. Dices: "quia te laudat." Puto mehercule id quoque esse causae,
sed tamen, etiam antequam ad eum locum veni, valde mihi placebat cum
sensus eius de re publica tum genus scribendi. Servius vero pacificator
cum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 315

have been taken for so many years. I wish you could obtain a promise
from Brutus and Cassius, not to enter upon any hot-headed scheme, as
easily as you can from me. For you say they wrote what you mention when
on the point of leaving the country. Whither and why? Stop them, I beg
you, Cicero, and do not let everything go to rack and ruin. For upon my
honour things are already being upset by rapine, fire, and slaughter. If
they have any fear, let them take some precaution merely, and not make
any fresh move. Upon my honour they will not accomplish any more by
violent measures than they will by quiet, provided they are careful. The
present unsettled state of affairs cannot last long in the nature of
things; if there is a struggle and they are here, they have power to do
much harm. What your hopes for them are, write and tell me at Tusculum."

There is Hirtius' letter. I answered, affirming that they had no
hot-headed scheme. I wanted you to know this for what it is worth.

Just as I had sealed this Balbus writes to me that Servilia has
returned, and avers that they will not leave Italy. Now I look for a
letter from you.


                                  VII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 28 or 29_, B.C. _44_]

Thanks for sending the letters. They have given me much pleasure,
especially that of our friend Sextus. You will say, "Because he praises
you." Upon my word I think that is part of the reason: but even before I
got to that passage I was very much pleased both by his sentiments on
politics and by his style. Servius the peacemaker with a nobody,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 316

librariolo suo videtur obisse legationem et omnes captiunculas
pertimescere. Debuerat autem non "ex iure manum consertum," sed quae
sequuntur; tuque scribes.


                                  VIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano prid. K. Iun. a 710_]

Post tuum discessum binas a Balbo (nihil novi) itemque ab Hirtio, qui se
scribit vehementer offensum esse veteranis. Exspectat animus, quidnam
agam de K. Misi igitur Tironem et cum Tirone plures, quibus singulis, ut
quicque accidisset, dares litteras, atque etiam scripsi ad Antonium de
legatione, ne, si ad Dolabellam solum scripsissem, iracundus homo
commoveretur. Quod autem aditus ad eum difficilior esse dicitur, scripsi
ad Eutrapelum, ut is ei meas litteras redderet. Legatione mihi opus
esse. Honestior est votiva, sed licet uti utraque.

De te, quaeso, etiam atque etiam vide. Velim possis coram; si minus,
litteris idem consequemur. Graeceius ad me scripsit C. Cassium sibi
scripsisse homines comparari, qui armati in Tusculanum mitterentur. Id
quidem mihi non videbatur; sed cavendum tamen tutelaeque plures
videndae. Sed aliquid crastinus dies ad cogitandum nobis dabit.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 317

his secretary, seems to have undertaken an embassy and to be on his
guard against all the quips and quiddities of the law. But he ought to
realize that it is not a case of "joining hands in legal claim," but of
what follows."[248] Please write.

Footnote 248:

  The quotation from Ennius continues: _sed magi ferro Rem repetunt_.
  What Servius Sulpicius was undertaking is uncertain; possibly to patch
  up peace between Antony and Caesar's murderers.


                                  VIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, May 31_, B.C. _44_]

After you had left came two letters from Balbus, with no news in them,
and one from Hirtius, who says he is very annoyed with the veterans. My
mind is still anxious about what I shall do about the 1st. So I have
sent Tiro and some men with him—please give them letters one by one, as
things happen—and I have written to Antony about the legation, for fear
that, if I had written only to Dolabella, his quick temper might be
aroused. But, as it is said to be rather difficult to get an audience
with him, I have written to Eutrapelus, so that he may deliver my
letter. I must have an embassy: a votive embassy is more honourable, but
I could use either.

Your own position, I beg you, review most carefully. I wish we could do
so together; if not, we must accomplish it by letters. Graeceius has
written to me that he has heard from Cassius that armed men are being
got ready to be sent to my house at Tusculum. I don't think that is the
case; but still I must take care to have more safeguards ready. But
to-morrow may give us some food for reflection.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 318


                                   IX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano IV Non. Iun. a. 710_]

IIII Non. vesperi a Balbo redditae mihi litterae fore Nonis senatum, ut
Brutus in Asia, Cassius in Sicilia frumentum emendum et ad urbem
mittendum curarent. O rem miseram! primum ullam ab istis, dein, si
aliquam, hanc legatoriam provinciam! Atque haud scio an melius sit quam
ad Eurotam sedere. Sed haec casus gubernabit. Ait autem eodem tempore
decretum iri, ut et iis et reliquis praetoriis provinciae decernantur.
Hoc certe melius quam illa Περσικὴ porticus; nolo enim Lacedaemonem
longinquiorem quam Lanuvium existimare. "Rides," inquies, "in talibus
rebus?" Quid faciam? plorando fessus sum.

Di inmortales! quam me conturbatum tenuit epistulae tuae prior pagina!
quid autem iste in domo tua casus armorum? Sed hunc quidem nimbum cito
transisse laetor. Tu quid egeris tua cum tristi tum etiam difficili ad
consiliandum legatione, vehementer exspecto; est enim inexplicabilis.
Ita circumsedemur copiis omnibus. Me quidem Bruti litterae, quas
ostendis a te lectas, ita perturbarunt, ut, quamquam ante egebam
consilio, tamen animi dolore sim tardior. Sed plura, cum ista cognoro.
Hoc autem tempore

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 319


                                   IX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 2_, B.C. _44_]

On the evening of the 2nd I received a letter from Balbus telling me
there would be a meeting of the Senate on the 5th to send Brutus to
Asia, and Cassius to Sicily, to buy corn and send it to Rome. What a
shame! First that they should take any office from that party, and
secondly, if any, that it should be this subordinate[249] position.
Still, I don't know whether it is not better than for him to sit on the
banks of his Eurotas.[250] But fate must have its way in this. He says
that at the same time a decree will be passed assigning provinces to
them and other ex-praetors. This is certainly better than his Persian
porch. For I don't want you to think I am referring to a Sparta farther
off than Lanuvium. "You can jest," you will say, "in such important
matters?" What am I to do? I am tired of mourning.

Footnote 249:

  Lit. "which could be delegated to _legati_."

Footnote 250:

  Brutus apparently called a stream on his estate at Lanuvium "Eurotas,"
  and a building there the "Persian porch," after the river Eurotas and
  the στοὰ Περσικὴ at Sparta.

Good God! how the first page of your note held me transfixed with
horror! How did that violent brawl happen in your house? But I am glad
this cloud passed away quickly. I am very eager to know how you have
fared with your sad and very difficult conciliatory mission; for the
knot cannot be unravelled. We are so surrounded by force of every kind.
Brutus' letter, which you show that you have read, has so disturbed me,
that, undecided as I was before, my sorrow makes me still slower at
making up my mind. But I will write more when I have news from you. At
present I have nothing to write,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 320

quod scriberem, nihil erat eoque minus, quod dubitabam, tu has ipsas
litteras essesne accepturus. Erat enim incertum, visurusne te esset
tabellarius. Ego tuas litteras vehementer exspecto.


                                   X

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano Non. Iun. aut postridie a. 710_]

O Bruti amanter scriptas litteras! o iniquum tuum tempus, qui ad eum ire
non possis! Ego autem quid scribam? ut beneficio istorum utantur? Quid
turpius? Ut moliantur aliquid? Nec audent nec iam possunt. Age,
quiescant auctoribus nobis; quis incolumitatem praestat? Si vero aliquid
de Decimo gravius, quae nostris vita, etiamsi nemo molestus sit? ludos
vero non facere! quid foedius? frumentum imponere! quae est alia Dionis
legatio aut quod munus in re publica sordidius? Prorsus quidem consilia
tali in re ne iis quidem tuta sunt, qui dant; sed possim id neglegere
proficiens; frustra vero qui ingrediar? Matris consilio cum utatur vel
etiam precibus, quid me interponam? Sed tamen cogitabo, quo genere utar
litterarum; nam silere non possum. Statim igitur mittam vel Antium vel
Circeios.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 321

especially as I have doubts as to whether you may get this letter. For
it is uncertain whether the messenger may see you. I am looking for a
letter from you very eagerly.


                                   X

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 5 or 6_, B.C. _44_]

What an affectionate letter from Brutus! And what hard luck that you
cannot go to him! But what am I to say? That they should accept the
other party's favours? That were the depth of shame. That they should
try some new move? They dare not, and now they cannot. Well, suppose I
advise them to keep quiet and they do, who can guarantee their safety?
Indeed, if anything unpleasant happens to Decimus, what sort of life
shall we lead, even if no one molests us? It is a sad disgrace not to
preside at the games.[251] Fancy putting the burden of the corn-supply
on them! What is this but promotion downwards,[252] and what state
office is more contemptible? To give advice in such matters is certainly
quite unsafe, even for those who give it. If I were doing good, I might
overlook that; but why should I put my foot in it to no purpose? Since
he is following his mother's advice, or rather her supplications, why
should I interfere? However, I will consider what kind of letter I can
write, for I must give some answer. So I will write at once either to
Antium or to Circeii.

Footnote 251:

  Brutus as _praetor urbanus_ ought to have presided at the Ludi
  Apollinares, but fearing to go to Rome he left it to a colleague Gaius
  Antonius.

Footnote 252:

  The banishment of Dion from Syracuse by the younger Dionysius under
  the pretext of an embassy seems to have passed into a proverb in this
  sense.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 322


                                   XI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Antiati a. d. VI Id. Iun a. 710_]

Antium veni a. d. VI Idus. Bruto iucundus noster adventus. Deinde multis
audientibus, Servilia, Tertulla, Porcia, quaerere, quid placeret. Aderat
etiam Favonius. Ego, quod eram meditatus in via, suadere, ut uteretur
Asiatica curatione frumenti; nihil esse iam reliqui, quod ageremus, nisi
ut salvus esset; in eo etiam ipsi rei publicae esse praesidium. Quam
orationem cum ingressus essem, Cassius intervenit. Ego eadem illa
repetivi. Hoc loco fortibus sane oculis Cassius (Martem spirare diceres)
se in Siciliam non iturum. "Egone ut beneficium accepissem contumeliam?"
"Quid ergo agis?" inquam. At ille in Achaiam se iturum. "Quid tu,"
inquam, "Brute?" "Romam," inquit, "si tibi videtur." "Mihi vero minime;
tuto enim non eris." "Quid? si possem esse, placeretne?" "Atque ut
omnino neque nunc neque ex praetura in provinciam ires; sed auctor non
sum, ut te urbi committas." Dicebam ea, quae tibi profecto in mentem
veniunt, cur non esset tuto futurus. Multo inde sermone querebantur,
atque id quidem Cassius maxime, amissas occasiones Decimumque graviter
accusabant. Ego negabam oportere praeterita, adsentiebar tamen. Cumque
ingressus essem dicere, quid oportuisset, nec vero quicquam novi, sed
ea,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 323


                                   XI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Antium, June 8_, B.C. _44_]

I reached Antium on the 8th. Brutus was very glad to see me. Then before
Servilia, Tertulla, Porcia,[253] and a lot of others, he asked me for my
opinion. Favonius was present too. I had made up my mind on the journey,
and advised him to accept the control of the corn supply from Asia:
there was nothing else for us to do now except to keep him out of
danger: by so doing we should have some safeguard for the republic too.
When I was in the midst of my speech, in came Cassius. I said the same
over again. Whereupon Cassius, with flashing eyes and fairly breathing
war, declared he would not go to Sicily. "Am I to take an insult like a
favour?" "What will you do then?" I asked; and he said he would go to
Achaia. "What of you, Brutus," I said. "To Rome," he answered, "if you
think I ought." "I don't think so at all, for you won't be safe." "Well,
if it were possible to be there in safety, would you approve?" "Yes, I
would rather you did not go to a province either now or after your
praetorship; but I don't advise you to trust yourself in Rome." I gave
him the reasons that will occur to you, why it would not be safe. Then
they kept on bewailing the chances that had been let slip, especially
Cassius, and they complained bitterly of Decimus. I said they ought not
to harp on the past, but I agreed with them. When I had gone on to
explain what ought to have been done, saying nothing new, but what
everybody is saying daily,

Footnote 253:

  Respectively mother, half-sister, and second wife of Brutus.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 324

quae cotidie omnes, nec tamen illum locum attingerem, quemquam praeterea
oportuisse tangi, sed senatum vocari, populum ardentem studio
vehementius incitari, totam suscipi rem publicam, exclamat tua
familiaris: "Hoc vero neminem umquam audivi!" Ego repressi. Sed et
Cassius mihi videbatur iturus (etenim Servilia pollicebatur se
curaturam, ut illa frumenti curatio de senatus consulto tolleretur), et
noster cito deiectus est de illo inani sermone quo Romae[254] velle esse
dixerat. Constituit igitur, ut ludi absente se fierent suo nomine.
Proficisci autem mihi in Asiam videbatur ab Antio velle. Ne multa, nihil
me in illo itinere praeter conscientiam meam delectavit. Non enim fuit
committendum, ut ille ex Italia, priusquam a me conventus esset,
discederet. Hoc dempto munere amoris atque officii sequebatur, ut mecum
ipse:

Footnote 254:

  quo Romae _added by Tyrrell_.

              "Ἡ δεῦρ' ὁδός σοι τί δύναται νῦν, θεοπρόπε;"

Prorsus dissolutum offendi navigium vel potius dissipatum. Nihil
consilio, nihil ratione, nihil ordine. Itaque, etsi ne antea quidem
dubitavi, tamen nunc eo minus evolare hinc idque quam primum,

            "ubi nec Pélopidarum fácta neque famam aúdiam."

Et heus tu! ne forte sis nescius, Dolabella me sibi legavit a. d. IIII
Nonas. Id mihi heri vesperi nuntiatum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 325

and not touching on the point as to whether anyone else ought to have
been attacked, but saying that the Senate ought to have been called, the
people in their violent excitement ought to have been roused to fury,
and the whole conduct of affairs taken over by them, your friend
Servilia exclaimed: "That I never heard anyone...." I interrupted her.
But I think Cassius will go (for Servilia promises she will see that
that appointment to the corn-supply shall be withdrawn from the
senatorial decree): and our friend soon gave up his silly talk of
wanting to go to Rome. So he has made up his mind that the games may be
held in his absence under his name. I fancy, however, he wants to set
out for Asia from Antium. To cut the matter short, I got nothing that
satisfied me out of that journey except the satisfaction to my
conscience. For I could not allow him to leave Italy before I had met
him. Save for fulfilling the duty I owed to our affection, I could not
help asking myself:

  "What makest thou with thy journey hither, seer?"[255]

Footnote 255:

  The author of this line, which is quoted again in _Att._ XVI. 6, is
  unknown.

In fact I found a ship breaking up, or rather already in wreckage. No
plan, no reason, no system. So, although I had no doubt even before, now
I have still less that I must fly away from here as fast as possible,

           "Where I may hear no bruit of Pelops' sons."[256]

Footnote 256:

  From the _Pelops_ of Accius.

And listen to this, if you have not heard it before: Dolabella has made
me one of his legates on the 2nd of June. That I was told yesterday
evening.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 326

est. Votiva ne tibi quidem placebat; etenim erat absurdum, quae, si
stetisset res publica, vovissem, ea me eversa illa vota dissolvere. Et
habent, opinor, liberae legationes definitum tempus lege Iulia, nec
facile addi potest. Aveo genus legationis, ut, cum velis, introire,
exire liceat; quod nunc mihi additum est. Bella est autem huius iuris
quinquennii licentia. Quamquam quid de quinquennio cogitem? Contrahi
mihi negotium videtur. Sed βλάσφημα mittamus.


                                  XII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Antiati V aut IV Id. Iun. a. 710_]

Bene mehercule de Buthroto. At ego Tironem ad Dolabellam cum litteris,
quia iusseras, miseram. Quid nocet? De nostris autem Antiatibus satis
videbar plane scripsisse, ut non dubitares, quin essent otiosi futuri,
usurique beneficio Antoni contumelioso. Cassius frumentariam rem
aspernabatur; eam Servilia sublaturam ex senatus consulto se esse
dicebat. Noster vero καὶ μάλα σεμνῶς in Asiam, posteaquam mihi est
adsensus tuto se Romae esse non posse (ludos enim absens facere
malebat), statim ait se iturum, simul ac ludorum apparatum iis, qui
curaturi essent, tradidisset. Navigia colligebat; erat animus in cursu.
Interea in isdem locis erant futuri. Brutus quidem se aiebat Asturae. L.
quidem Antonius liberaliter litteris sine cura me esse iubet. Habeo unum
beneficium, alterum fortasse, si in Tusculanum venerit.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 327

Even you did not like the idea of a votive legation; for indeed it was
absurd for me to be fulfilling vows after the constitution was
overthrown, which I had made in case it were maintained. I fancy, too,
free legations have a limit of time set by one of Caesar's laws, and it
is not easy to get it prolonged. I want the kind of legation that lets
you come and go as you please, and that I have got now. It is a fine
thing, too, to have the privilege for five years. Though why do I think
of five years? Things seem to me to be drawing to a crisis: but _absit
omen_.


                                  XII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Antium, June 9 or 10_, B.C. _44_]

That's jolly good news about Buthrotum. But I had sent Tiro to Dolabella
with a letter as you bade me. What harm is there in it? About our
friends at Antium, I think I wrote plainly enough for you not to doubt
that they are going to take things quietly and accept Antonius'
insulting favour. Cassius rejects the corn-supply job, and Servilia says
she will cut it out of the senatorial decree. Our friend is taking
things very seriously, now he agrees with me that he cannot be safe in
Rome (for he prefers the games to take place in his absence). He says he
will go to Asia at once, as soon as he has handed over the management of
the games to those who will attend to it. He is collecting vessels, and
his heart is set on going. Meantime they will stay in the same places.
Brutus says he will be at Astura. L. Antonius has sent a kind letter
telling me to have no fear. That's one thing I have to thank him for;
perhaps there will be another, if he comes to

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 328

O negotia non ferenda! quae feruntur tamen. Τῶνδε αἰτίαν τῶν Βρούτων τίς
ἔχει; In Octaviano, ut perspexi, satis ingenii, satis animi,
videbaturque erga nostros ἥρωας ita fore, ut nos vellemus, animatus. Sed
quid aetati credendum sit, quid nomini, quid hereditati, quid κατηχήσει,
magni consilii est. Vitricus quidem nihil censebat; quem Asturae
vidimus. Sed tamen alendus est, et, ut nihil aliud, ab Antonio
seiungendus. Marcellus praeclare, si praecipit nostro nostra. Cui quidem
ille deditus mihi videbatur. Pansae autem et Hirtio non nimis credebat.
Bona indoles, ἐὰν διαμείνῃ.


                                  XIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano VIII K. Nov. a. 710_]

VIII Kal. duas a te accepi epistulas. Respondebo igitur priori prius.
Adsentior tibi, ut nec duces simus nec agmen cogamus, faveamus tamen.
Orationem tibi misi. Eius custodiendae et proferendae arbitrium tuum.
Sed quando illum diem, cum tu edendam putes? Indutias quas scribis, non
intellego fieri posse. Melior est ἀναντιφωνησία; qua me usurum arbitror.
Quod scribis legiones duas Brundisium venisse, vos omnia prius. Scribes
igitur, quicquid audieris. Varronis διάλογον exspecto. Iam probo
Ἡρακλείδειον, praesertim cum tu tanto opere delectere;

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 329

Tusculum. What intolerable nuisances! Yet we put up with them. Which of
the Bruti have we to thank for this? In Octavianus, as I have observed,
there is plenty of wit and plenty of spirit, and he seems likely to be
as well disposed to our heroes as we could wish. But it is a grave
question how far we can trust one of his age, name, heritage, and
bringing up. His father-in-law, whom I saw at Astura, thinks he is not
to be trusted at all. However, we must look after him, and, if nothing
else, dissociate him from Antonius. Marcellus will be doing well if he
inculcates our views into Brutus, to whom Octavianus seems to be well
affected. In Pansa and Hirtius, however, he has but little trust. His
disposition is good, if it will last.


                                  XIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, Oct. 25_, B.C. _44_]

On the 25th I received two letters from you. So I will answer the former
first. I agree with you that we need not be the first to move nor the
last to follow, but that we should incline to Brutus' side. I have sent
you my speech,[257] and leave it to you to keep it or publish it. But
when shall we see the day when you will think it right to publish it? I
don't understand how the truce you mention can be possible. It is better
to make no reply; and that, I think, is what I shall do. You say that
two legions have arrived at Brundisium: you get all the news first. So
you must write whatever you hear. I am expecting Varro's dialogue.[258]
I agree now about writing something in Heracleides' style,[259]
especially as you like it

Footnote 257:

  The _Second Philippic_, an answer to Antony's speech of September 19,
  never actually delivered by Cicero.

Footnote 258:

  A promised dialogue in which Cicero was to take part, or which was to
  be dedicated to him.

Footnote 259:

  Cf. XV. 4.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 330

sed, quale velis, velim scire. Quod ad te antea atque adeo prius scripsi
(sic enim mavis), ad scribendum (licet enim[260] tibi vere dicere)
fecisti me acriorem. Ad tuum enim iudicium, quod mihi erat notum,
addidisti Peducaei auctoritatem, magnam quidem apud me et in primis
gravem. Enitar igitur, ne desideres aut industriam meam aut diligentiam.
Vettienum, ut scribis, et Faberium foveo. Clodium nihil arbitror
malitiose; quamquam—sed quod egerit. De libertate retinenda, qua certe
nihil est dulcius, tibi adsentior. Itane Gallo Caninio? O hominem
nequam! quid enim dicam aliud? Cautum Marcellum! me sic, sed non tamen
cautissimum.

Footnote 260:

  licet enim _added by Lehmann_.

Longiori epistulae superiorique respondi. Nunc breviori propiorique quid
respondeam, nisi eam fuisse dulcissimam? Res Hispanienses valde bonae,
modo Balbilium incolumem videam, subsidium nostrae senectutis. De
Anniano idem, quod me valde observat Visellia. Sed haec quidem humana.
De Bruto te nihil scire dicis, sed Servilia venisse M. Scaptium, eumque
non qua pompa adsuevisset, ad se tamen clam venturum sciturumque me
omnia; quae ego statim. Interea narrat eadem Bassi servum venisse, qui
nuntiaret legiones Alexandrinas in armis esse, Bassum arcessi, Cassium
exspectari. Quid quaeris? videtur res publica ius suum recuperatura. Sed
ne

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 331

so much; but I will write whatever you wish. As I told you before, or
rather previously, as you prefer to say, I must confess you have made me
more eager to write. For to your own opinion, which I knew, you have
added Peducaeus' authority, which I count great and as weighty as any.
So I will make an effort not to disappoint you in my industry or
diligence. I am making much of Vettienus and Faberius, as you suggest. I
don't think Clodius meant any harm, though—but it is nothing to me.[261]
I agree with you about preserving our liberty, our most precious
possession. So it is Gallus Caninius' turn now?[262] What a knave! For
what else can one call him? How cautious Marcellus is. So am I, but not
overcautious.

Footnote 261:

  After _quod egerit_ some such words as _id actum habebo_ must be
  supplied. On this phrase, which occurs several times in Cicero's
  letters, cf. Lehmann, _De epp. ad Atticum recensendis_, 1892, p. 189.

Footnote 262:

  From _Att._ XVI. 14 it appears that Gallus had just died. Probably
  Antony, to whom the next words apparently refer, threatened to
  confiscate his property.

I have answered your longer and earlier letter. Now what can I say to
the shorter and more recent, except that it was most delightful? Affairs
in Spain are going really well, if only I can see Balbilius in safety as
a support for our old age. About Annianus[263] I agree, as Visellia is
very polite to me. But that is the way of the world. You say you know
nothing of Brutus, but Servilia says M. Scaptius has come, and that
without any of his usual parade, and he will pay her a visit quietly,
and I shall be told everything. I shall know soon. Meantime she says a
slave of Bassus has come announcing that the legions in Alexandria are
in arms, that Bassus has been summoned, and Cassius is expected with
eagerness. In short it looks as though the republic was going to recover
its rights. But don't let us anticipate. You

Footnote 263:

  Or "the estate of Annius," as Shuckburgh.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 332

quid ante. Nosti horum exercitationem in latrocinio et amentiam.

Dolabella, vir optimus, etsi, cum scribebam secunda mensa adposita,
venisse eum ad Baias audiebam, tamen ad me ex Formiano scripsit, quas
litteras, cum e balineo exissem, accepi, sese de attributione omnia
summa fecisse. Vettienum accusat (tricatur scilicet ut monetalis), sed
ait totum negotium Sestium nostrum suscepisse, optimum quidem illum
virum nostrique amantissimum. Quaero autem, quid tandem Sestius in hac
re facere possit, quod non quivis nostrum. Sed, si quid praeter spem
erit, facies, ut sciam; sin est, ut arbitror, negotium perditum, scribes
tamen, neque ista res commovebit.

Nos hic φιλοσοφοῦμεν (quid enim aliud?) et τὰ περὶ τοῦ καθήκοντος
magnifice explicamus προσφωνοῦμενque Ciceroni; qua de re enim potius
pater filio? Deinde alia. Quid quaeris? exstabit opera peregrinationis
huius. Varronem hodie aut cras venturum putabant; ego autem in
Pompeianum properabam, non quo hoc loco quicquam pulchrius, sed
interpellatores illic minus molesti. Sed perscribe, quaeso, quae causa
sit Myrtilo (poenas quidem illum pependisse audivi), et satisne pateat,
unde corruptus.

Haec cum scriberem, tantum quod existimabam ad te orationem esse
perlatam. Hui, quam timeo, quid existimes! Etsi quid ad me? quae non sit
foras proditura nisi re publica recuperata. De quo quid sperem, non
audeo scribere.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 333

know what practice that lot have had in rascality, and how reckless they
are.

That pretty fellow Dolabella has written to me from Formiae, though,
when I was writing this letter at dessert, I heard he had arrived at
Baiae, and I got his letter as I left my bath. He says he has done his
level best about assigning debts to me. He blames Vettienus—of course he
is up to some dodge like a true business man—but he says Sestius, who is
a very honest fellow and a good friend of mine, has undertaken the whole
affair. Still, I should like to know what on earth Sestius can do in
this business that any of us could not have done. But if anything does
happen contrary to my expectation, you must let me know; while, if it
is, as I suspect, a hopeless business, write all the same: it will not
disturb me.

I am philosophizing here (what else can I do?) and getting on splendidly
with my _De Officiis_, which I am dedicating to my son. A father could
not choose a more appropriate subject. Then I shall turn to other
subjects. In fact this excursion will have some works to show for
itself. Varro is expected either to-day or to-morrow; but I am hastening
to Pompeii, not that anything could be prettier than this place, but I
shall be less bothered by interruptions there. But please inform me what
the charge was against Myrtilus,[264] for I hear he has been executed,
and whether it has come out who suborned him.

Footnote 264:

  Cf. _Att._ XVI. 11. He was accused of attempting to murder Antony.

As I am writing this, it just occurs to me that my speech is being
delivered to you. How I fear your judgment on it! Though what does it
matter to me, as it will not be published, unless the constitution is
restored? And what hope I have of that I dare not say.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 334


                                  XIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano V K. Quint. a. 710_]

VI Kalend. accepi a Dolabella litteras. Quarum exemplum tibi misi. In
quibus erat omnia se fecisse, quae tu velles. Statim ei rescripsi et
multis verbis gratias egi. Sed tamen, ne miraretur, cur idem iterum
facerem, hoc causae sumpsi, quod ex te ipso coram antea nihil potuissem
cognoscere. Sed quid multa? litteras hoc exemplo dedi:

                      "CICERO DOLABELLAE COS. SUO.

"Antea cum litteris Attici nostri de tua summa liberalitate summoque
erga se beneficio certior factus essem, cumque tu ipse etiam ad me
scripsisses te fecisse ea, quae nos voluissemus, egi tibi gratias per
litteras iis verbis, ut intellegeres nihil te mihi gratius facere
potuisse. Postea vero quam ipse Atticus ad me venit in Tusculanum huius
unius rei causa, tibi ut apud me gratias ageret, cuius eximiam quandam
et admirabilem in causa Buthrotia voluntatem et singularem erga se
amorem perspexisset, teneri non potui, quin tibi apertius illud idem his
litteris declararem. Ex omnibus enim, mi Dolabella, studiis in me et
officiis, quae summa sunt, hoc scito mihi et amplissimum videri et
gratissimum esse, quod perfeceris, ut Atticus intellegeret, quantum ego
te, quantum tu me amares. Quod reliquum est, Buthrotiam et causam et
civitatem, quamquam a te constituta est (beneficia autem nostra tueri
solemus),

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 335


                                  XIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 27_, B.C. _44_]

On the 26th I received a letter from Dolabella, and I am sending you a
copy of it. In it he says he has done everything you wanted. I answered
at once, thanking him profusely. However, to prevent his wondering why I
should do so twice, I gave as a reason that I had not been able to get
any information from you before when I met you. But, to cut it short,
here is a copy of my letter:—

              "CICERO TO HIS FRIEND DOLABELLA THE CONSUL.

"Once before, when our friend Atticus had informed me by letter of your
great liberality and the great kindness you had shown him, and when you
yourself had written that you had done all that we wished, I sent you my
thanks couched in such terms that you might understand that you had done
me the greatest favour. But afterwards, when Atticus came himself to me
at Tusculum solely to declare his gratitude to you, as he had observed
your remarkable and indeed wonderful kindness in the matter of the
people of Buthrotum and your strong affection for himself, I could not
help expressing my thanks again more clearly in this letter. For of all
the favours and services you have done for me, and they are
overwhelming, my dear Dolabella, let me assure you that the highest and
the most gratifying is, that you have shown Atticus how great my
affection is for you, and yours for me. For the rest, as one generally
wishes to secure favours received, though the case of Buthrotum and its
existence as a city have been set on a firm footing by you, I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 336

tamen velim receptam in fidem tuam a meque etiam atque etiam tibi
commendatam auctoritate et auxilio tuo tectam velis esse. Satis erit in
perpetuum Buthrotiis praesidii, magnaque cura et sollicitudine Atticum
et me liberaris, si hoc honoris mei causa susceperis, ut eos semper a te
defenses velis. Quod ut facias, te vehementer etiam atque etiam rogo."

His litteris scriptis me ad συντάξεις dedi; quae quidem vereor ne
miniata cerula tua pluribus locis notandae sint. Ita sum μετέωρος et
magnis cogitationibus impeditus.


                                   XV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Antiati Id. Iun. a. 710_]

L. Antonio male sit, si quidem Buthrotiis molestus est! Ego testimonium
composui, quod, cum voles, obsignabitur. Nummos Arpinatium, si L. Fadius
aedilis petet, vel omnes reddito. Ego ad te alia epistula scripsi de HS
¯CX¯, quae Statio curarentur. Si ergo petet Fadius, ei volo reddi,
praeter Fadium nemini. Apud me idem puto depositum. Id scripsi ad Erotem
ut redderet.

Reginam odi. Id me iure facere scit sponsor promissorum eius Ammonius,
quae quidem erant φιλόλογα et dignitatis meae, ut vel in contione dicere
auderem. Saran autem, praeterquam quod nefarium hominem, cognovi
praeterea in me contumacem. Semel eum omnino domi meae vidi. Cum
φιλοφρόνως

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 337

should like you to use your authority and your power to protect it, as
it was put in your care and repeatedly recommended to you by me. That
will be sufficient to safeguard Buthrotum for ever, and, if in
compliment to me you will undertake to see them always protected, you
will relieve Atticus and me of a great care and anxiety: and this I beg
and entreat you to do."

After finishing this letter I have devoted myself to my treatise. I fear
you will run your red pencil under many passages in it. I have been so
distracted and hindered by weighty thoughts.


                                   XV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Antium, June 13_, B.C. _44_]

Hang L. Antonius if he is obnoxious to the Buthrotians. I have drawn up
a deposition, which shall be signed whenever you like. If the aedile L.
Fadius asks for the money belonging to the people of Arpinum, pay it him
back in full. In another letter I mentioned the 1,000 guineas to be paid
to Statius. Well, if Fadius asks for them, I wish them to be paid to
him, but to no one else. I think it was deposited with me. I have
written to Eros to pay it.

I detest Cleopatra; and the voucher for her promises, Ammonius, knows I
have good reason to do so. Her promises were all things that had to do
with learning and not derogatory to my dignity, so I could have
mentioned them even in a public speech. Sara, besides being a knave, I
have noticed is also impertinent to me. Once, and only once, have I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 338

ex eo quaererem, quid opus esset, Atticum se dixit quaerere. Superbiam
autem ipsius reginae, cum esset trans Tiberim in hortis, commemorare
sine magno dolore non possum. Nihil igitur cum istis; nec tam animum me
quam vix stomachum habere arbitrantur.

Profectionem meam, ut video, Erotis dispensatio impedit. Nam, cum ex
reliquis, quae Nonis Aprilibus fecit, abundare debeam, cogor mutuari,
quodque ex istis fructuosis rebus receptum est, id ego ad illud fanum
sepositum putabam. Sed haec Tironi mandavi, quem ob eam causam Romam
misi; te nolui impeditum impedire. Cicero noster quo modestior est, eo
me magis commovet. Ad me enim de hac re nihil scripsit, ad quem nimirum
potissimum debuit; scripsit hoc autem ad Tironem, sibi post Kalend.
Apriles (sic enim annuum tempus confici) nihil datum esse. Tibi pro tua
natura semper placuisse teque existimasse scio, id etiam ad dignitatem
meam pertinere eum non modo liberaliter a nobis, sed etiam ornate
cumulateque tractari. Quare velim cures (nec tibi essem molestus, si per
alium hoc agere possem), ut permutetur Athenas, quod sit in annuum
sumptum ei. Scilicet Eros numerabit. Eius rei causa Tironem misi.
Curabis igitur et ad me, si quid tibi de eo videbitur, scribes.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 339

seen him in my house; and then, when I asked politely what he wanted, he
said he wanted Atticus. But the insolence of the queen herself, when she
was in her villa across the river, I cannot mention without great
indignation. So no dealings with them. They don't credit me with any
spirit or even any feelings at all.

My departure from Italy I see is hindered by Eros' management of my
affairs. For, although from the balances he made on April 5 I ought to
have plenty of cash, I have to borrow, and I think the receipts from
those paying concerns are set aside for the shrine. But I have given
Tiro orders about this, and am sending him to Rome on purpose. I did not
want to add to your worries. The more moderate in his demands my son is,
the more am I concerned about him. For he has not mentioned this point
to me, the person of all others to whom of course he ought to have
mentioned it; but in a letter to Tiro he said I had sent him nothing
since April 1, which was the end of his financial year. Now I know that
you, with your usual amiability, have always agreed and indeed thought
that among other things my dignity demanded that he should be treated
not only liberally, but even with excessive and extravagant liberality.
So I should like you to see that he has a bill of exchange for his
annual allowance payable at Athens. I would not trouble you, if I could
manage it through anyone else. Eros, of course, will pay you. That is
why I have sent Tiro. Please see about it and let me know if you have
any views on the point.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 340


                                  XVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Antiati III aut prid. Id. Iun. a. 710_]

Tandem a Cicerone tabellarius, et mehercule litterae πεπινωμένως
scriptae, quod ipsum προκοπὴν aliquam significat, itemque ceteri
praeclara scribunt; Leonides tamen retinet suum illud "adhuc," summis
vero laudibus Herodes. Quid quaeris? vel verba mihi dari facile patior
in hoc, meque libenter praebeo credulum. Tu velim, si quid tibi est a
Statio scriptum, quod pertineat ad me, certiorem me facias.


                                  XVIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati XIV aut XIII K. Iun. a. 710_]

Narro tibi, haec loca venusta sunt, abdita certe, et, si quid scribere
velis, ab arbitris libera. Sed nescio quo modo οἶκος φίλος. Itaque me
referunt pedes in Tusculanum. Et tamen haec ῥωπογραφία ripulae videtur
habitura celerem satietatem. Equidem etiam pluvias metuo, si Prognostica
nostra vera sunt; ranae enim ῥητορεύουσιν. Tu, quaeso, fac sciam, ubi
Brutum nostrum et quo die videre possim.


                                  XVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Antiati postr. Id. Iun. a. 710_]

Duas accepi postridie Idus, alteram eo die datam, alteram Idibus. Prius
igitur superiori. De D. Bruto, cum scies. De consulum ficto timore
cognoveram.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 341


                                  XVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Antium, June 11 or 12_, B.C. _44_]

At last a messenger from my son, and upon my word a letter written in
first class style. That itself shows some advance, and other people send
most favourable reports too. Leonides, however, still sticks to his "at
present,"[265] while Herodes bestows the highest praise. Indeed, in this
respect I gladly allow myself even to be hoodwinked, and am not sorry to
be credulous. I should like you to let me know if Statius has written
anything that concerns me.

Footnote 265:

  Cf. _Att._ XIV. 16.


                                  XVIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, May 19 or 20_, B.C. _44_]

I tell you what, this place is lovely, and certainly it is retired and
free from overlookers, if you want to write. But somehow or other
there's no place like home.[266] So my feet are carrying me back to
Tusculum. And after all the tameness of this bit of coast would
probably soon cloy on one. Besides, I am afraid of rain, if our
_Prognostics_[267] are right, for the frogs are holding forth. Please
let me know where Brutus is and when I can see him.

Footnote 266:

  Apparently a proverb.

Footnote 267:

  Cicero translated the _Prognostica_ of Aratus into Latin verse.


                                  XVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Antias, June 14_, B.C. _44_]

I received two letters on the 14th, one dated the same day, one the day
before. So I answer the earlier first. Tell me about D. Brutus, when you
know. I had heard of the pretended terror of the consuls.[268]

Footnote 268:

  They were afraid of violence on the part of Brutus and Cassius.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 342

Sicca enim φιλοστόργως ille quidem, sed tumultuosius ad me etiam illam
suspicionem pertulit. Quid tu autem? "τὰ μὲν διδόμενα ——"? Nullum enim
verbum a Siregio. Non placet. De Plaetorio, vicino tuo, permoleste tuli
quemquam prius audisse quam me. De Syro prudenter. L. Antonium per
Marcum fratrem, ut arbitror, facillime deterrebis. Antroni vetui; sed
nondum acceperas litteras, ne cuiquam nisi L. Fadio aedili. Aliter enim
nec caute nec iure fieri potest. Quod scribis tibi desse HS ¯C¯, quae
Ciceroni curata sint, velim ab Erote quaeras, ubi sit merces insularum.
Arabioni de Sittio nihil irascor. Ego de itinere nisi explicato Λ nihil
cogito; quod idem tibi videri puto. Habes ad superiorem.

Nunc audi ad alteram. Tu vero facis ut omnia, quod Serviliae non dees,
id est Bruto. De regina gaudeo te non laborare, testem etiam tibi
probari. Erotis rationes et ex Tirone cognovi et vocavi ipsum.
Gratissimum, quod polliceris Ciceroni nihil defuturum; de quo mirabilia
Messalla, qui Lanuvio rediens ab illis venit ad me, et mehercule ipsius
litterae sic et φιλοστόργως et πεπινωμένως scriptae, ut eas vel in
acroasi audeam legere. Quo magis illi indulgendum puto. De Buciliano
Sestium puto non moleste ferre. Ego, si Tiro ad me, cogito in
Tusculanum. Tu vero, quicquid erit, quod me scire par sit, statim.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 343

For Sicca, in a very friendly but rather panic-stricken manner, has
brought me word of that suspicion too. What do you say? "Take what the
gods give"?[269] For I have not a word from Siregius. I don't like it.
About your neighbour Plaetorius I was very annoyed that anyone heard
before I did. About Syrus you did well. I fancy you will easily frighten
L. Antonius through his brother Marcus. I told you not to pay Antro, but
you had not yet received my letter forbidding you to pay anyone except
L. Fadius the aedile. It is the only safe and proper thing. You say you
are £1,000 out of pocket on the money sent to my son; please ask Eros
what has become of the rents of the blocks of houses. I am not at all
angry with Arabio about Sittius. I am not thinking of starting on my
journey until my accounts[270] are all settled, and of that I think you
approve. There is my answer to your first letter.

Footnote 269:

  A proverb presumably ending ἀνάγκη δέχεσθαι, "one must put up with,"
  or something similar.

Footnote 270:

  If Λ stands for λοίπῳ = _reliquiis_ "balance," as was suggested by
  Gronovius.

Now hear what I have to say to the second. You are acting as kindly as
usual in standing by Servilia, that is to say, Brutus. As to Cleopatra,
I am glad you are not anxious and that you accept the evidence. The
state of Eros' accounts I have heard from Tiro, and I have sent for Eros
himself. I am most grateful for your promise not to let my son lack in
anything. Messalla, on his way back from our adversaries at Lanuvium,
called on me with wonderfully good news about him, and upon my word his
own letter is so affectionate and well-written that I should not be
ashamed to read it before an audience. So I feel all the more
indulgently disposed towards him. I don't think Sestius is annoyed about
Bucilianus. As soon as Tiro returns home, I am thinking of going to
Tusculum. Please let me know at once, if there is anything that I ought
to know.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 344


                                 XVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in itinere ex Antiati in Tusculanum XVI K. Quint. a.
           710_]

XVII Kal. etsi satis videbar scripsisse ad te, quid mihi opus esset, et
quid te facere vellem, si tibi commodum esset, tamen, cum profectus
essem et in lacu navigarem, Tironem statui ad te esse mittendum, ut iis
negotiis, quae agerentur, interesset, atque etiam scripsi ad Dolabellam
me, si ei videretur, velle proficisci, petiique ab eo de mulis vecturae.
Ut in his (quoniam intellego te distentissimum esse qua de Buthrotiis,
qua de Bruto, cuius etiam ludorum sumptuosorum[271] curam et
administrationem suspicor ex magna parte ad te pertinere) ut ergo in
eius modi re tribues nobis paulum operae; nec enim multum opus est.

Footnote 271:

  sumptuosorum _Lehmann_: suorum _MSS._

Mihi res ad caedem et eam quidem propinquam spectare videtur. Vides
homines, vides arma. Prorsus non mihi videor esse tutus. Sin tu aliter
sentis, velim ad me scribas. Domi enim manere, si recte possum, multo
malo.


                                  XIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano inter a. d. XV et XI K. Quint. a. 710_]

Quidnam est, quod agendum amplius de Buthrotiis sit? Egisse[272] enim te
frustra scribis. Quid autem se refert Brutus? Doleo mehercules te tam
esse distentum, quod decem hominibus referendum est

Footnote 272:

  sit? egisse _Boot_: stetisse _MSS._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 345


                                 XVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _On the way to Tusculum, June 16_, B.C. _44_]

Though I think I told you sufficiently what I wanted and what I wished
you to do, if it was convenient to you, in my letter of the 15th, still,
when I had started and was crossing the lake, I determined to send Tiro
to you that he might attend to the necessary matters with you; and I
wrote, too, to Dolabella, saying I wanted to start if he agreed, and
asked him about baggage mules. So far as you can—I understand you are
utterly distracted with business, what with the Buthrotians and what
with Brutus, as I expect the care and arrangement of his sumptuous games
fall largely to your share—still, so far as you can, give a little
attention to my affairs. I shall not want much.

To me things seem to foreshadow bloodshed, and that quite soon. You see
the men, you see their warlike preparations. Indeed I do not count
myself safe at all. If you think differently, I wish you would write.
For, if I can with safety, I should much prefer to stay at home.


                                  XIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 17 to 21_, B.C. _44_]

What more can we possibly do about Buthrotum? For you say your labour
has been in vain. Why too is Brutus returning to Rome? I am really very
sorry you have been so overworked: you are indebted for

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 346

acceptum. Est illud quidem ἐργῶδες, sed ἀνεκτὸν mihique gratissimum. De
armis nihil vidi apertius. Fugiamus igitur, et ut ais. Coram Theophanes
quid velit, nescio. Scripserat enim ad me. Cui rescripsi, ut potui. Mihi
autem scribit venire ad me se velle, ut et de suis rebus et quaedam,
quae ad me pertinerent. Tuas litteras exspecto. Vide, quaeso, ne quid
temere fiat.

Statius scripsit ad me locutum secum esse Q. Ciceronem valde
adseveranter se haec ferre non posse; certum sibi esse ad Brutum et
Cassium transire. Hoc enim vero nunc discere aveo: hoc ego quid sit
interpretari non possum. Potest aliquid iratus Antonio, potest gloriam
iam novam quaerere, potest totum esse σχεδίασμα; et nimirum ita est. Sed
tamen et ego vereor, et pater conturbatus est; scit enim, quae ille de
hoc, mecum quidem ἄφατα olim. Plane, quid velit, nescio. A Dolabella
mandata habebo, quae mihi videbuntur, id est nihil. Dic mihi, C.
Antonius voluitne fieri septemvir? Fuit certe dignus. De Menedemo est,
ut scribis. Facies omnia mihi nota.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 347

that to the ten commissioners.[273] That is certainly a tough piece of
business, but one has to put up with it, and I am very thankful for it.
As to the imminence of war I never saw anything more obvious. So let me
flee, and in the way you suggest. I do not know why Theophanes wants to
see me, for he wrote to me. I answered as best I could. But he writes
saying he wants to come to me to discuss his own affairs and some that
concern me. I am looking for a letter from you. Pray see that nothing is
done rashly.

Footnote 273:

  The commissioners for distributing land in Epirus.

Statius has written to me saying my nephew Quintus has told him with
emphasis that he cannot put up with things, and has resolved to go over
to Brutus and Cassius. Here is something I am very eager to understand:
here is a puzzle I can't interpret. Perhaps he is angry with Antony
about something; perhaps he is looking for some new way of
distinguishing himself; or perhaps it is all bunkum; and no doubt that
is what it is. But for all that I am afraid, and his father is disturbed
about him, for he knows what he used to say about Antony; indeed, he
said things to me which I cannot repeat. What on earth he means I can't
think. I shall only have such commissions as I choose from Dolabella,
that is, none at all. Tell me if C. Antonius wanted to be put on the
land commission.[274] He would certainly have been in his proper place.
About Menedemus it is as you say. Please keep me posted up in all news.

Footnote 274:

  Seven commissioners were appointed to distribute land in Italy among
  the soldiers. As the next sentence implies, several of them were
  nonentities.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 348


                                   XX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano inter XV et XI K. Quint, a. 710_]

Egi gratias Vettieno; nihil enim potuit humanius. Dolabellae mandata
sint quaelibet, mihi aliquid, vel quod Niciae nuntiem. Quis enim haec,
ut scribis, ἀντερεῖ[275]? Nunc dubitare quemquam prudentem, quin meus
discessus desperationis sit, non legationis? Quod ais extrema quaedam
iam homines de re publica loqui et eos quidem viros bonos, ego, quo die
audivi illum tyrannum in contione "clarissimum virum" appellari,
subdiffidere coepi. Postea vero quam tecum Lanuvi vidi nostros tantum
spei habere ad vivendum, quantum accepissent ab Antonio, desperavi.
Itaque, mi Attice (fortiter hoc velim accipias, ut ego scribo), genus
illud interitus, quo causae cursus[276] est, foedum ducens, et quasi
denuntiatum nobis ab Antonio, ex hac nassa exire constitui non ad fugam,
sed ad spem mortis melioris. Haec omnis culpa Bruti.

Footnote 275:

  ἀντερεῖ _Tyrrell_: anteno _MSS._: λεπτύνει _Gronovius and most
  editors_.

Footnote 276:

  causae cursus _Popma_: causa cursus _Z_: causurus _M^1_: casurus
  _M^2_: Catulus usus est _Madvig, which gives a better sense but is
  not very near the reading of the MSS._

Pompeium Carteiae receptum scribis. Iam igitur contra hunc exercitum.
Utra ergo castra? Media enim tollit Antonius. Illa infirma, haec
nefaria. Properemus igitur. Sed iuva me consilio, Brundisione an
Puteolis. Brutus quidem subito, sed sapienter. Πάσχω τι. Quando enim
illum? Sed humana ferenda. Tu ipse eum videre non potes. Di illi mortuo,
qui umquam Buthrotum! Sed acta missa; videamus, quae agenda sint.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 349


                                   XX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 17 to 21_, B.C. _44_]

I have thanked Vettienus; for nothing could have been kinder. Let
Dolabella give me what commissions he will, provided I have something,
even a message to Nicias. For, as you say, who will deny it? Can any
sane man doubt now that I am going away in despair, not on a mission?
You say that people, aye, even good citizens, are talking of desperate
political measures. I began to have my doubts on the day that I heard
that tyrant called "a most distinguished man." Afterwards, when I was
with you at Lanuvium and saw that our friends had precisely so much hope
of life as Antony gave them, I lost all hope. So, my dear Atticus, I
hope you will take what I am going to say with the same courage as I
write it. As I think the kind of death towards which the current of
affairs is setting is disgraceful and hold that we are practically
condemned to it by Antony, I have decided to escape from the toils, not
so much to escape as in hope of a better death. All this is Brutus'
fault.

You say Pompeius has been received at Carteia. So there will soon be an
army sent against him. Then which camp am I to choose? For Antony makes
neutrality impossible. That is weak, this is criminal. So let me hasten
away. But give me your counsel whether to sail from Brundisium or
Puteoli. Brutus does wisely to go, but it is sudden. I am rather upset
about it, for when shall I see him again? But such is life. You yourself
cannot see him. Heaven confound that dead man for ever touching
Buthrotum. But away with the past; let us see what has to be done.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 350

Rationes Erotis, etsi ipsum nondum vidi, tamen et ex litteris eius et ex
eo, quod Tiro cognovit, prope modum cognitas habeo. Versuram scribis
esse faciendam mensum quinque, id est ad Kal. Nov., HS ¯CC¯; in eam
diem cadere nummos, qui a Quinto debentur. Velim igitur, quoniam Tiro
negat tibi placere me eius rei causa Romam venire, si ea te res nihil
offendet, videas, unde nummi sint, mihi feras expensum. Hoc video in
praesentia opus esse. Reliqua diligentius ex hoc ipso exquiram, in his
de mercedibus dotalium praediorum. Quae si fideliter Ciceroni
curabuntur, quamquam volo laxius, tamen ei prope modum nihil derit.
Equidem video mihi quoque opus esse viaticum; sed ei ex praediis, ut
cadet, ita solvetur, mihi autem opus est universo. Equidem, etsi mihi
videtur iste, qui umbras timet, ad caedem spectare, tamen nisi explicata
solutione non sum discessurus. Sitne autem explicata necne, tecum
cognoscam. Hanc putavi mea manu scribendam itaque feci. De Fadio, ut
scribis, utique alii nemini. Rescribas velim hodie.


                                  XXI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano X K. Quint. a. 710_]

Narro tibi, Quintus pater exsultat laetitia. Scripsit enim filius se
idcirco profugere ad Brutum voluisse, quod, cum sibi negotium daret
Antonius, ut eum dictatorem efficeret, praesidium occuparet, id
recusasset;

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 351

Though I have not yet seen Eros, from his letters and from what Tiro
found out I know pretty well how his accounts stand. You say I must
raise a fresh loan for some £2,000 for five months, that is, till the
1st of November, when Quintus' debt falls due. So, since Tiro says you
do not want me to come to Rome on purpose for that, if you do not mind,
I should be glad if you would see where I can get the money, and put it
down on my account. I see it is necessary for the present. I will
enquire more closely into the rest from Eros himself, among other things
about the rents of Terentia's dower property. If they are properly
looked after for my son he will be pretty well provided for, though I
want him to be more liberally treated. I see I shall want some
journey-money myself; but he can get the rents of the property as they
fall due, whereas I shall require a lump sum. I certainly shall not
leave until the money has been paid, though that trembler at
shadows[277] seems to me to be meditating a massacre. However, whether
it has been arranged or not, I shall learn when I see you. I thought I
had better write this myself, and so I have done so. As you say about
Fadius: the money must not go to anyone else in any case. Please answer
by return.

Footnote 277:

  Antony, who professed to be afraid of assassination at the hands of
  Brutus and Cassius. Cf. XV. 17.


                                  XXI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 22_, B.C. _44_]

I must tell you my brother Quintus is jumping for joy. For his son has
written saying that his reason for wanting to take refuge with Brutus
is, that when Antony asked him to secure him the dictatorship and seize
some fort, he refused, and the reason for

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 352

recusasse autem se, ne patris animum offenderet; ex eo sibi illum
hostem. "Tum me," inquit, "collegi verens, ne quid mihi ille iratus tibi
noceret. Itaque eum placavi. Et quidem ¯CCCC¯ certa, reliqua in spe."
Scribit autem Statius illum cum patre habitare velle (hoc vero mirum) et
id gaudet. Ecquem tu illo certiorem nebulonem?

Ἐποχὴν vestram de re Cani probo. Nihil eram suspicatus de tabulis,
ἀκεραίως restitutam arbitrabar. Quae differs, ut mecum coram,
exspectabo. Tabellarios, quoad voles, tenebis; es enim occupatus. Quod
ad Xenonem, probe. Quod scribo, cum absolvero. Quinto scripsisti te ad
eum litteras. Nemo attulerat. Tiro negat iam tibi placere Brundisium et
quidem dicere aliquid de militibus. At ego iam destinaram Hydruntem
quidem. Movebant me tuae quinque horae. Hic autem quantus πλοῦς! Sed
videbimus. Nullas a te XI Kal. Quippe, quid enim iam novi? Cum primum
igitur poteris, venies. Ego propero, ne ante Sextus; quem adventare
aiunt.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 353

his refusal was that he did not want to hurt his father's feelings; and
from that time Antony has been his enemy. "Then," he says, "I pulled
myself together for fear that he should do you some mischief in his
wrath with me; and so I smoothed him down, and indeed got £4,000[278] in
cash, and have hopes of some more." Statius, however, says he wants to
live with his father—which is a wonder—and my brother is delighted about
it. Did you ever see a more thorough rascal?

Footnote 278:

  400 sestertia.

I approve of your hesitation in the arrangement with Canus.[279] I had
no idea about the documents; I thought her dowry had been paid back in
full. I shall look forward to the matters you refrain from mentioning
till we meet. Keep the messengers as long as you like, as you are busy.
As to Xeno, quite right. What I am writing I will send when it is
finished. You told Quintus you had sent him a letter, but none has been
brought as yet. Tiro says you disapprove of Brundisium now, and indeed
says something about soldiers. But I have already fixed upon Hydrus.
Your saying that it was only a fivehour passage decided me. Think of the
endless voyage from here. But we shall see. I had no letter from you on
the 21st. Of course, for what news can there be now? Come, then, as soon
as you can. I am in a hurry, for Sextus may get here before I leave.
They say he is coming.

Footnote 279:

  Apparently there were negotiations for a marriage between young
  Quintus and Canus' daughter, who had lately been divorced. Cf. XIII.
  41.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 354


                                  XXII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano V K. Quint. mane a. 710_]

Gratulor nobis Quintum filium exisse. Molestus non erit. Pansam bene
loqui credo. Semper enim coniunctum esse cum Hirtio scio; amicissimum
Bruto et Cassio puto, si expediet (sed quando illos videbit?), inimicum
Antonio, quando aut cur? Quousque ludemur? Ego autem scripsi Sextum
adventare, non quo iam adesset, sed quia certe id ageret ab armisque
nullus discederet. Certe, si pergit, bellum paratum est. Hic autem
noster Cytherius nisi victorem neminem victurum. Quid ad haec Pansa?
utrobi erit, si bellum erit? quod videtur fore. Sed et haec et alia
coram hodie quidem, ut scribis, aut cras.


                                 XXIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VIII aut VII K. Quint. a. 710_]

Mirifice torqueor, sine dolore tamen; sed permulta mihi de nostro
itinere in utramque partem occurrunt. "Quousque?" inquies. Quoad erit
integrum; erit autem, usque dum ad navem. Pansa si tuae rescripserit, et
meam tibi et illius epistulam mittam. Silium exspectabam; cui hypomnema
compositum. Si quid novi. Ego litteras misi ad Brutum. Cuius de itinere
etiam ex te velim, si quid scies, cognoscere.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 355


                                  XXII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 27_, B.C. _44_]

Young Quintus' absence is a blessing; he won't be a nuisance to us. I
believe Pansa is talking amiably. I know he is always hand in glove with
Hirtius; I think he will be quite friendly with Brutus and Cassius, if
it is expedient—but will he ever see them?—and that he will oppose
Antony: but when and how? How long are we to be fooled? I said Sextus
was coming, not because he was already near, but because he certainly
has it in mind, and does not show the least sign of laying down his
arms. Certainly, if he goes on, war must come. But our good lover of
Cytheris[280] thinks no one sure of his life unless he gains a victory.
What has Pansa to say to this? And which side will he take if there is
war? So far as I can see, there will be. But more of this and other
things when we meet—to-day, according to your letter, or to-morrow.

Footnote 280:

  Antony. Cf. X. 10.


                                 XXIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 24 or 25_, B.C. _44_]

I am absolutely on the rack, but not with pain. So many ideas for and
against that journey of mine keep occurring to me. You will ask how long
that is going to last. Until the matter is settled, and that won't be
till I am on board ship. If Pansa sends an answer to your note, I will
forward my letter and his. I am expecting Silius, and have a memorandum
drawn up for him. If there is any news—— I have written to Brutus. If
you know anything about his movements, I should be glad to hear that
too.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 356


                                  XXIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano VI K. Quint. mane a. 710_]

Tabellarius, quem ad Brutum miseram, ex itinere rediit VII Kal. Ei
Servilia dixit eo die Brutum H.IS[281] profectum. Sane dolui meas
litteras redditas non esse. Silius ad me non venerat. Causam composui;
eum libellum tibi misi. Te quo die exspectem, velim scire.

Footnote 281:

  H.IS (= hora prima semis) _Orelli_: his _most MSS._


                                  XXV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano III K. Quint. a. 710_]

De meo itinere variae sententiae; multi enim ad me. Sed tu incumbe,
quaeso, in eam curam. Magna res est. An probas, si ad Kal. Ian.
cogitamus? Meus animus est aequus, sic tamen, ut si nihil offensionis
sit. Et tu etiam, scisne,[282] quo die olim piaculum?[283] Ut ut est
res,[284] casus consilium nostri itineris iudicabit. Dubitemus igitur.
Est enim hiberna navigatio odiosa, eoque ex te quaesieram mysteriorum
diem. Brutum, ut scribis, visum iri a me puto. Ego hinc volo pr. Kal.

Footnote 282:

  scisne» scire _MSS._

Footnote 283:

  olim piaculum _Bosius_: Olympiacum mysteria scilicet _MSS._ (_the last
  two words are rejected as a gloss by Boot_): Olympia _Shuckburgh_.

Footnote 284:

  ut ut est res _Moser_: ut tu scires _MSS._: ut tu scribis _Lambinus_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 357


                                  XXIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 26_, B.C. _44_]

The messenger I sent to Brutus just got back yesterday, Servilia told
him Brutus had started at half-past six in the morning. I was very sorry
he did not get my letters. Silius has not come yet. I have drawn up a
statement of his case, and am sending the pamphlet to you. I should like
to know when to expect you.


                                  XXV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, June 29_, B.C. _44_]

Opinions differ about my journey, for I have had a lot of visitors. But
please apply yourself to the question. It is a serious matter. Do you
approve of my idea of returning by the 1st of January? I am open-minded
on the subject, provided I don't give any offence. By the way, too, do
you know the date of the sacrilege of yore?[285] However that may be,
chance will decide the plan of my journey. So let us leave it in doubt.
For a winter journey is most unpleasant, and that was why I asked you
the date of the mysteries.[286] Brutus, as you say, I think I shall see.
I want to leave here on the last of the month.

Footnote 285:

  If the reading is right, which is very uncertain, this must refer to
  the violation of the rites of Bona Dea by Clodius in Cicero's
  consulship. It may, however, refer to the Olympic games as Shuckburgh
  suggests.

Footnote 286:

  _Vide_ last note. Shuckburgh, however, thinks it refers to the
  Eleusinian mysteries.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 358


                                  XXVI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati VI Non. Quint. a. 710_]

De Quinti negotio video a te omnia facta. Ille tamen dolet dubitans,
utrum morem gerat Leptae an fidem infirmet filio. Inaudivi L. Pisonem
velle exire legatum ψευδεγγράφῳ senatus consulto. Velim scire, quid sit.
Tabellarius ille, quem tibi dixeram a me ad Brutum esse missum, in
Anagninum ad me venit ea nocte, quae proxima ante Kal. fuit, litterasque
ad me attulit; in quibus unum alienum summa sua prudentia, idem illud,
ut spectem ludos suos. Rescripsi scilicet primum me iam profectum, ut
non integrum sit; deinde ἀτοπώτατον esse me, qui Romam omnino post haec
arma non accesserim neque id tam periculi mei causa fecerim quam
dignitatis, subito ad ludos venire. Tali enim tempore ludos facere illi
honestum est, cui necesse est, spectare mihi, ut non est necesse, sic ne
honestum quidem est. Equidem illos celebrari et esse quam gratissimos
mirabiliter cupio, idque ita futurum esse confido, et tecum ago, ut iam
ab ipsa commissione ad me, quem ad modum accipiantur hi ludi, deinde
omnia reliquorum ludorum in dies singulos persequare. Sed de ludis
hactenus. Reliqua pars epistulae est illa quidem in utramque partem, sed
tamen non nullos interdum iacit igniculos viriles. Quod quale tibi
videretur, ut posses interpretari, misi ad te exemplum epistulae;
quamquam mihi tabellarius

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 359


                                  XXVI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, July 2_, B.C. _44_]

I see you have done all you could in Quintus' business. He, however, is
in distress and doubt as to whether he shall oblige Lepta or damage his
son's credit. I have heard a rumour that L. Piso wants to go on a
mission with a forged decree of the senate. I should like to know what
there is in it. The messenger I told you I had sent to Brutus came to me
at Anagnia on the night of the 30th of June, and brought me a letter in
which there was one request quite unlike his usual common-sense, the
same old request that I should be present at his games. I answered, of
course, firstly that I had already set out now, so that it was not in my
power to do so, and secondly that it would be most out of place for me,
who have not been near Rome at all since the outbreak of war—not so much
to preserve my safety as to preserve my dignity—suddenly to go to the
games. For at such a time it was honourable for him to give the games,
since he had to do so, but, as there was no necessity for me to attend
them, it would not be honourable for me to do so. Of course I keenly
desire that they should be well attended and very popular, and I trust
they will be; and I beg you to send me a description of how these games
and all the other games are received day by day from the very beginning.
But enough of the games. The rest of the letter is, one must confess, of
rather a dubious kind, but still he does at times emit some sparks of
manly courage. That you may judge for yourself what it is like, I have
sent you a copy of the letter, although

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 360

noster dixerat tibi quoque se attulisse litteras a Bruto easque ad te e
Tusculano esse delatas.

Ego itinera sic composueram, ut Nonis Quinctilibus Puteolis essem; valde
enim festino, ita tamen, ut, quantum homo possit, quam cautissime
navigem. M. Aelium cura liberabis; me paucos pedes[287] in extremo fundo
et eos quidem subterraneos servitutis putasse aliquid[288] habituros. Id
me iamiam nolle neque mihi aquam[289] esse tanti. Sed, ut mihi dicebas,
quam lenissime, potius ut cura liberetur, quam ut me suscensere aliquid
suspicetur. Item de illo Tulliano capite libere cum Cascellio loquere.
Parva res est, sed tu bene attendisti. Nimis callide agebatur. Ego
autem, si mihi imposuisset aliquid, quod paene fecit, nisi tua malitia
affuisset, animo iniquo tulissem. Itaque, utut erit, rem impediri malo.
Octavam partem Tullianarum aedium ad Streniae[290] memineris deberi
Caerelliae.[291] Videris mancipio dare ad eam summam, quae sub praecone
fuit maxima. Id opinor esse ¯CCCLXXX¯.

Footnote 287:

  pedes _Turnebus_: pe _Z_^t: spe _M_: specus _Z_^l, _Lambinus_.

Footnote 288:

  putasse aliquid _Madvig_: apud tale quid _M_.

Footnote 289:

  aquam _Turnebus_: quam _M_ _Z_^t.

Footnote 290:

  Tullianarum aedium ad Streniae _Lambinus and Turnebus_: tuli luminarum
  medium ad strane _MSS._

Footnote 291:

  deberi Caerelliae _Shuckburgh_: cui Caerellia _MSS._

Novi si quid erit, atque etiam si quid prospicies, quod futurum putes,
scribas ad me quam saepissime.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 361

my messenger tells me he brought you a letter, too, from Brutus, and
that it was forwarded to you from Tusculum.

I have arranged my journeys so that I shall be at Puteoli on the 7th of
July; for, though I am in a great hurry, I mean to take every care
humanly possible in my voyage. Please relieve M. Aelius of his anxiety.
Tell him I thought that on a few feet at the far end of the land there
might be some sort of claims, and those only underground. Also that I
have not the slightest desire for it, and that I don't value water at
that price.[292] But, as you suggested, do it as mildly as possible,
rather to relieve him of anxiety than to suggest that I am in the least
annoyed. Again, about that debt of Tullius: speak to Cascellius frankly.
It is a small matter, but I am glad you attended to it. There was too
much trickery about it: and, if he had cheated me at all, which he very
nearly did if you had not been too sharp for him, I should have been
very much annoyed. So, whatever happens, I would rather the matter were
broken off. Remember that an eighth share of the houses of Tullius near
the temple of Strenia is due to Caerellia, and see that it is conveyed
to her at the highest price bid at the auction. I think that was some
3,000 guineas.[293]

Footnote 292:

  The reading and meaning of this passage is uncertain. Apparently
  either Cicero had asserted some claim on some underground water-pipes
  on property of Aelius adjoining his own, and was now disclaiming it;
  or Aelius had been commissioned to buy property for Cicero on which
  there was a disputed claim to such pipes, and Cicero refuses to
  purchase on that ground. _Servitus_ above is used in the
  technical-legal sense of an "easement" or liability on property.

Footnote 293:

  380 sestertia. On this debt cf. _Att._ XII. 51.

If there is any news, and, even if you foresee anything you think likely
to happen, I should like you to write to me as often as possible. To
Varro

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 362

Velim Varroni, quem ad modum tibi mandavi, memineris excusare tarditatem
litterarum mearum. Mundus iste cum M. Ennio quid egerit de testamento
(curiosus enim), facias me velim certiorem. Ex Arpinati VI Non.


                                 XXVII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati V Non. Quint. a. 710_]

Gaudeo id te mihi suadere, quod ego mea sponte pridie feceram. Nam, cum
ad te VI Nonas darem, eidem tabellario dedi etiam ad Sestium scriptas
πάνυ φιλοστόργως. Ille autem, quod Puteolos persequitur, humane, quod
queritur, iniuste. Non enim ego tam illum expectare, dum de Cosano
rediret, debui, quam ille aut non ire, antequam me vidisset, aut citius
reverti. Sciebat enim me celeriter velle proficisci seseque ad me in
Tusculanum scripserat esse venturum. Te, ut a me discesseris, lacrimasse
moleste ferebam. Quod si me praesente fecisses, consilium totius
itineris fortasse mutassem. Sed illud praeclare, quod te consolata est
spes brevi tempore congrediendi; quae quidem exspectatio me maxime
sustentat. Meae tibi litterae non derunt. De Bruto scribam ad te omnia.
Librum tibi celeriter mittam "de gloria." Excudam aliquid Ἡρακλείδειον,
quod lateat in thesauris tuis. De Planco memini. Attica iure queritur.
Quod me de Bacchi,[294] de statuarum coronis certiorem fecisti, valde
gratum; nec quicquam posthac non modo tantum, sed ne tantulum quidem
praeterieris.

Footnote 294:

  Bacchide _Graevius, assuming it to be the name of an actress appearing
  at the games given by Brutus_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 363

remember to plead my excuses for my slowness in writing, as I told you.
What your friend Mundus has done with M. Ennius about the will, please
let me know, for I am inquisitive. Arpinum, July 2.


                                 XXVII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, July 3_, B.C. _44_]

I am glad you recommend me to do what I did of my own accord yesterday.
For to the same messenger, to whom I gave the letter I sent you on the
2nd, I also gave another for Sestius, written in very friendly terms. It
is very good of him to follow me to Puteoli, but he has no grounds for
his complaint. For it was not my business to wait for his return from
Cosa, so much as it was his not to go until he had seen me, or to return
more quickly. He knew I wanted to start in a hurry, and he told me he
would come to me at Tusculum. I am grieved that you wept when you left
me. If you had done so in my presence, I might have changed all my plans
about going. But there is one good thing, that you were consoled by the
thought of meeting me again soon; and that, indeed, is the hope that
buoys me up. I will not stint you of letters, and will give you full
news about Brutus. I will send you my book _On Glory_ soon. I will
hammer out something in the style of Heracleides to be stored up in your
treasure-house. I remember about Plancus. Attica has good reason for
grumbling. I am much obliged to you for telling me about the garlands
for Bacchus and the statues. Please don't omit any detail of the same
importance, or even of the smallest importance in the future. I

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 364

Et de Herode et Mettio meminero et de omnibus, quae te velle suspicabor
modo. O turpem sororis tuae filium! Cum haec scriberem, adventabat αὐτῇ
βουλύσει cenantibus nobis.


                                 XXVIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati V Non. Quint. a. 710_]

Ego, ut ad te pridie scripseram, Nonis constitueram venire in
Puteolanum. Ibi igitur cotidie tuas litteras exspectabo et maxime de
ludis; de quibus etiam ad Brutum tibi scribendum est. Cuius epistulae,
quam interpretari ipse vix poteram, exemplum pridie tibi miseram.
Atticae meae velim me ita excuses, ut omnem culpam in te transferas, et
ei tamen confirmes me immutatum amorem meum mecum abstulisse.


                                  XXIX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Formiano III Non. Quint. a. 710_]

Bruti ad te epistulam misi. Di boni, quanta ἀμηχανία! Cognosces, cum
legeris. De celebratione ludorum Bruti tibi adsentior. Ad M. Aelium
nullus tu quidem domum, sed sicubi inciderit. De Tulliano semisse M.
Axianum adhibebis, ut scribis. Quod cum Cosiano egisti, optime. Quod non
solum mea, verum etiam tua eadem expedis, gratum. Legationem probari
meam gaudeo. Quod promittis, di faxint! Quid enim mihi meis iucundius?
Sed istam, quam tu

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 365

won't forget about Herodes or Mettius, or anything that I have the least
suspicion you would like. What disgraceful conduct of your sister's son!
Here he is coming as the shades of night are falling, just as I am
writing this at the dinner-table.


                                 XXVIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, July 3_, B.C. _44_]

As I told you in my letter yesterday, I have arranged to be at Puteoli
on the 7th. So I shall look for a daily letter from you there,
especially about the games. You ought to write to Brutus too about them.
I sent you a copy yesterday of a letter of his, of which I can hardly
make anything myself. Please make my excuses to Attica by taking the
blame on yourself and assuring her that I depart with undiminished
affection for her.


                                  XXIX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Formiae, July 5_, B.C. _44_]

I am sending you Brutus' letter. Heavens, what a helpless condition he
is in! You will understand when you have read it. I agree about the
celebration of his games. Don't go to Aelius' house on any account, but
speak to him if you happen to meet him. Take M. Axianus' advice about
the half of Tullius' debt, as you suggest. What you have done with
Cosianus is excellent. Thanks for clearing up my affairs and your own at
the same time. I am glad you approve of my appointment. God grant your
promises come true. For what could suit me and mine better? But I am
afraid of the proviso

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 366

excipis, metuo. Brutum cum convenero, perscribam omnia. De Planco et
Decimo sane velim. Sextum scutum abicere nolebam. De Mundo, si quid
scies. Rescripsi ad omnia tua; nunc nostra accipe.

Quintus filius usque Puteolos (mirus civis, ut tu Favonium Asinium
dicas) et quidem duas ob causas, et ut mecum et σπείσασθαι vult cum
Bruto et Cassio. Sed tu quid ais? Scio enim te familiarem esse Othonum.
Ait hic sibi Iuliam ferre; constitutum enim esse discidium. Quaesivit ex
me pater, qualis esset fama. Dixi nihil sane me audisse (nesciebam enim,
cur quaereret) nisi de ore et patre. "Sed quorsus?" inquam. At ille
filium velle. Tum ego, etsi ἐβδελυττόμην, tamen negavi putare me illa
esse vera. Σκοπὸς est enim huic nostro nihil praebere, illa autem οὐ
παρὰ τοῦτον. Ego tamen suspicor hunc, ut solet, alucinari. Sed velim
quaeras (facile autem potes) et me certiorem.

Obsecro te, quid est hoc? Signata iam epistula Formiani, qui apud me
cenabant, Plancum se aiebant hunc Buthrotium pridie, quam hoc scribebam,
id est III Non., vidisse demissum, sine phaleris; servulos autem dicere
eum et agripetas eiectos a Buthrotiis. Macte! Sed, amabo te, perscribe
mihi totum negotium.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 367

you make about Attica's ill-health. When I meet Brutus I will tell you
all about him. I hope you are right about Plancus and Decimus. I am
sorry if Sextus is throwing down his shield. Give me news of Mundus if
you have any. I have answered all your points: now for my own news.

Young Quintus is coming with me as far as Puteoli—what a noble citizen!
you might call him a Favonius Asinius.[295] He has two reasons: he wants
to be with me and to make peace with Brutus and Cassius. But what have
you to say to this? For I know you are intimate with the Othones. He
says that Julia proposed it herself, for a divorce has been arranged.
His father has asked me what sort of reputation she has. Not knowing why
he asked, I said I had never heard anything about her except about her
looks and her father. "But why?" I asked: and he said his son wanted
her. Then, though I was disgusted, I said I did not believe in those
reports. My brother's point is not to offer him any allowance, but she
says it is no business of his. I suspect, however, he is indulging in
fairy tales as usual. Still I should like you to make enquiries, which
will be no trouble to you, and let me know.

Footnote 295:

  Favonius was a follower of Cato; Asinius Pollio a Caesarian. Possibly
  Cicero may mean that Quintus sided with both parties; but the exact
  meaning is doubtful.

What, pray, is this? When I had already sealed this letter, some
Formians, who were dining with me, said they had seen Plancus[296]—the
one from Buthrotus—the day before I wrote this, that is, on the 5th,
with downcast mien and unapparelled steed;[297] and that his boys said
he and the land-grabbers had been ejected by the Buthrotians. Well done
they! But pray let me know all the circumstances.

Footnote 296:

  Head of the land-commissioners in Epirus.

Footnote 297:

  As Tyrrell suggests, this is probably a quotation from a play.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 368




                           M. TULLI CICERONIS
                         EPISTULARUM AD ATTICUM
                          LIBER SEXTUS DECIMUS


                                   I

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano VIII Id. Quint. a. 710_]

Nonis Quinctilibus veni in Puteolanum. Postridie iens ad Brutum in
Nesidem haec scripsi. Sed eo die, quo veneram, cenanti Eros tuas
litteras. Itane? NONIS IULIIS? Di hercule istis! Sed stomachari totum
diem licet. Quicquamne turpius quam Bruto IULIIS? Redeo ad meum igitur
"ἔτ' ἐῶμεν;" Nihil vidi. Sed quid est, quaeso, quod agripetas Buthroti
concisos audio? Quid autem Plancus tam cursim (ita enim inaudiebam) diem
et noctem? Sane cupio scire, quid sit. Meam profectionem laudari gaudeo.
Videndum est, ut mansio laudetur. Dymaeos agro pulsos mare infestum
habere nil mirum. Ἐν ὁμοπλοίᾳ Bruti videtur aliquid praesidii esse, sed,
opinor, minuta navigia. Sed iam sciam et ad te cras. De Ventidio πανικὸν
puto. De Sexto pro certo habebatur abicere[298] arma. Quod si verum est,
sine bello

Footnote 298:

  abicere _Klotz_: ad _MSS._: haud ad _Orelli_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 369




                            CICERO'S LETTERS
                               TO ATTICUS
                                BOOK XVI


                                   I

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, July 8_, B.C. _44_]

On the 7th of Quinctilis I arrived at Puteoli, and I am writing this on
the following day as I am crossing to Brutus at Nesis. The day I arrived
Eros brought me your letter as I was dining. Is it really so? The 9th of
_July_?[299] Heaven confound them! But I could go on cursing all day.
Could they have insulted Brutus worse than with their _July_? So I must
fall back on my old cry, "How long, O Lord?" I have never seen anything
like that. But what, pray, is this I hear about the land-grabbers being
cut to pieces at Buthrotum? And why has Plancus been on the run, as they
tell me he has, day and night? I am very eager to know what it means. I
am glad my departure is approved; I must see whether my staying may be
approved too. That the people of Dyme, now they have been expelled from
their land, should take to piracy is no wonder. There may be some
safeguard in having Brutus as a fellow-passenger, but I think his
vessels are small. I shall know soon and will tell you to-morrow. I
think the report about Ventidius is a false alarm. It is held pretty
certain that Sextus is laying down his arms; and, if that is so, it
looks as though we should be reduced to slavery without even a civil
war. What

Footnote 299:

  The month Quinctilis had recently been renamed Julius after Caesar,
  who was born in that month.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 370

civili video serviendum. Quid ergo? ad Kal. Ian. in Pansa spes? Λῆρος
πολὺς in vino et in somno istorum.

De ¯CCX¯ optime. Ciceronis rationes explicentur. Ovius enim recens. Is
multa, quae vellem, in iis ne hoc quidem malum[300] HS ¯LXXII¯ satis
esse, adfatim prorsus, sed Xenonem perexigue et γλίσχρως praebere. Quo
plus permutasti quam ad fructum insularum, id ille annus habeat, in quem
itineris sumptus accessit. Hinc ex Kal. Apr. ad HS ¯LXXX¯ accommodetur.
Nunc enim insulae tantum. Videndum enim est quid, cum Romae erit. Non
enim puto socrum illam ferendam. Pindaro de Cumano negaram. Nunc, cuius
rei causa tabellarium miserim, accipe. Quintus filius mihi pollicetur se
Catonem. Egit autem et pater et filius, ut tibi sponderem, sed ita, ut
tum crederes, cum ipse cognosses. Huic ego litteras ipsius arbitratu
dabo. Eae te ne moverint. Has scripsi in eam partem, ne me motum
putares. Di faxint, ut faciat ea, quae promittit! Commune enim gaudium.
Sed ego—nihil dico amplius. Is hinc VII Idus. Ait enim attributionem in
Idus, se autem urgeri acriter. Tu ex meis litteris, quo modo respondeas,
moderabere. Plura, cum et Brutum videro et Erotem remittam. Atticae meae
excusationem accipio eamque amo plurimum; cui et Piliae salutem.

Footnote 300:

  _After_ malum _the MSS. have_ in mandatis si abunde, _which was
  deleted by Lambinus as a gloss_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 371

hope have we, then? In Pansa, when he enters office? There is nothing
but midsummer madness in their drunken dreams.

About the £2,000[301]: well done! Put my son's affairs straight. For
Ovius has just come, and brings much satisfactory news; among other
things, what is no bad hearing, that £700[302] is enough, quite enough,
but that Xeno treats him very sparingly and niggardly. The excess over
the rental of the town houses that your bill of exchange cost, may be
reckoned to the year, in which there was the additional expense of the
journey. From the 1st of April on let him have up to £800,[303] for that
is the rent of the city property now. Some sort of provision must be
made for him when he comes to Rome. For I don't think he could endure
that woman as a mother-in-law. I refused Pindarus' offer for the villa
at Cumae. Now let me tell you why I have sent a messenger. Young Quintus
is promising to be as prim as a puritan: and both he and his father have
begged me to go bail to you for him, but on the condition that you only
believe it when you see it. I shall give him a letter according to his
fancy, but don't take any notice of it. I am writing now to prevent you
from thinking that I do. God grant he keeps his promise. It would be a
satisfaction to everybody. But I—I won't say any more. He is leaving on
the 9th. For he says there is some money to be paid over on the 15th,
but that he is very hard pressed. You will judge from my letter how to
answer. More when I have seen Brutus and am sending Eros back. I accept
dear Attica's apology and send her my best love. Give my regards to her
and Pilia.

Footnote 301:

  210 sestertia.

Footnote 302:

  72 sestertia.

Footnote 303:

  80 sestertia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 372


                                   II

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano V Idus Quint. a. 710_]

VI Idus duas epistulas accepi, unam a meo tabellario, alteram a Bruti.
De Buthrotiis longe alia fama in his locis fuerat, sed cum aliis multis
hoc ferendum. Erotem remisi citius, quam constitueram, ut esset, qui
Hortensio et Ouiae[304] quibus quidem ait se Idibus constituisse.
Hortensius vero impudenter. Nihil enim debetur ei nisi ex tertia
pensione, quae est Kal. Sext.; ex qua pensione ipsa maior pars est ei
soluta aliquanto ante diem. Sed haec Eros videbit Idibus.

Footnote 304:

  Ouiae _Gurlitt_: quia e _MSS._: coheredibus _Junius_.

De Publilio autem, quod perscribi oportet, moram non puto esse
faciendam. Sed, cum videas, quantum de iure nostro decesserimus, qui de
residuis ¯CCCC¯ HS ¯CC¯ praesentia solverimus, reliqua rescribamus,
loqui cum eo, si tibi videbitur, poteris eum commodum nostrum exspectare
debere, cum tanta sit a nobis iactura facta iuris. Sed, amabo te, mi
Attice (videsne, quam blande?), omnia nostra, quoad eris Romae, ita
gerito, regito, gubernato, ut nihil a me exspectes. Quamquam enim
reliqua satis apta sunt ad solvendum, tamen fit saepe, ut ii, qui
debent, non respondeant ad tempus. Si quid eius modi acciderit, ne quid
tibi sit fama mea potius. Non modo versura, verum etiam venditione, si
ita res coget, nos vindicabis.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 373


                                   II

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, July 11_, B.C. _44_]

On the 10th I received two letters, one by my own messenger, another
from Brutus'. Here the story about the Buthrotians was very different;
but that, like many other things, we must put up with. I have sent Eros
back sooner than I intended, that there may be someone to pay Hortensius
and Ovia, with whom, indeed, he says he had made an appointment for the
15th. It is really shameless of Hortensius, for there is nothing owing
to him except on the third instalment, which is due on the 1st of
August; and the greater part of that instalment has been paid some time
before the proper date. But Eros will see to that on the 15th.

In Publilius' case I don't think there ought to be any delay in letting
him have a draft for what is owing. But, when you see how much I have
yielded my rights in paying up half of a balance of £4,000[305] in ready
money, and now giving a bill for the rest, you may, if you think fit,
tell him that he ought to await my convenience, when I have waived so
much of my rights. But please, my dear Atticus—see how coaxingly I put
it—do transact, regulate, and manage all my affairs while you are in
Rome, without waiting for a hint from me. For though I have sufficient
outstanding debts to meet my creditors, it often happens that the
debtors don't pay at the proper time. If anything of that sort happens,
consider nothing so much as my credit. Preserve it not only by raising a
fresh loan, but by selling if necessary.

Footnote 305:

  400 sestertia. The money was a repayment of the dowry Cicero had
  received with his second wife, whom he had since divorced.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 374

Bruto tuae litterae gratae erant. Fui enim apud illum multas horas in
Neside, cum paulo ante tuas litteras accepissem. Delectari mihi Tereo
videbatur et habere maiorem Accio quam Antonio gratiam. Mihi autem quo
laetiora sunt, eo plus stomachi et molestiae est populum Romanum manus
suas non in defendenda re publica, sed in plaudendo consumere. Mihi
quidem videntur istorum animi incendi etiam ad repraesentandam
improbitatem suam. Sed tamen,

             "dúm modo doleant áliquid, doleant quídlibet."

Consilium meum quod ais cotidie magis laudari, non moleste fero,
exspectabamque, si quid de eo ad me scriberes. Ego enim in varios
sermones incidebam. Quin etiam idcirco trahebam, ut quam diutissime
integrum esset. Sed, quoniam furcilla extrudimur, Brundisium cogito.
Facilior enim et exploratior devitatio legionum fore videtur quam
piratarum, qui apparere dicuntur.

Sestius VI Idus exspectabatur, sed non venerat, quod sciam. Cassius cum
classicula sua venerat. Ego, cum eum vidissem, V Id. in Pompeianum
cogitabam, inde Aeculanum. Nosti reliqua. De Tutia ita putaram. De
Aebutio non credo nec tamen curo plus quam tu. Planco et Oppio scripsi
equidem, quoniam rogaras, sed, si tibi videbitur, ne necesse habueris
reddere. Cum enim tua causa fecerint omnia, vereor, ne meas litteras
supervacaneas arbitrentur,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 375

Brutus was pleased with your letter. I spent several hours with him at
Nesis, just after I received your letter. He seemed to be delighted at
the Tereus incident, and to feel more grateful to Accius than to
Antonius.[306] For my part the better the news is, the more it annoys
and pains me, that the Roman people use their hands not for defending
the constitution but for clapping. It seems to me that the Caesarian
party is possessed of a positive mania for parading its disloyalty.
However, "so they but suffer, be it what it will."[307]

Footnote 306:

  There had been some exhibition of public feeling at the performance of
  Accius' _Tereus_ at the games given by Brutus. Here, and in the
  _Philippics_ II. 31, it is implied that it was favourable to Brutus,
  but Appius, _B.C._ III. 24, states that outbursts against Caesar's
  assassins drove them to decide on leaving Italy.

Footnote 307:

  From Afranius. Cf. Cicero, _Tusc. Disp._ IV. 45 and 55.

You say my plan is daily more commended. I am not sorry, and I am
looking forward to anything you may say about it. For I have met with
various opinions; and, indeed, for that reason I am hesitating as long
as possible before committing myself. But since I am being turned out
with a pitchfork, I am thinking of Brundisium. For it seems to me to be
more certain and easier to avoid the soldiers than the pirates, who are
said to be in evidence.

I expected Sestius on the 10th, but he has not come, so far as I know.
Cassius has arrived with his little fleet. When I have seen him, I am
thinking of going on the 11th to Pompeii, and thence to Aeculanum. You
know the rest. About Tutia, that is what I thought. As for Aebutius, I
don't believe it; nor do I care any more than you do. I have written of
course to Plancus and Oppius, as you asked me: but, if you think better
of it, don't hold yourself bound to deliver the letters. For, since they
have done it all for your sake, I fear my letters

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 376

Oppio quidem utique, quem tibi amicissimum cognovi. Verum, ut voles.

Tu, quoniam scribis hiematurum te in Epiro, feceris mihi gratum, si ante
eo veneris, quam mihi in Italiam te auctore veniendum est. Litteras ad
me quam saepissime; si de rebus minus necessariis, aliquem nanctus; sin
autem erit quid maius, domo mittito.

Ἡρακλείδειον, si Brundisium salvi, adoriemur. "De gloria" misi tibi.
Custodies igitur, ut soles, sed notentur eclogarii, quos Salvius bonos
auditores nactus in convivio dumtaxat legat. Mihi valde placent, mallem
tibi. Etiam atque etiam vale.


                                  III

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Pompeiano XVI K. Sext. a. 710_]

Tu vero sapienter (nunc demum enim rescribo iis litteris, quas mihi
misisti convento Antonio Tiburi) sapienter igitur, quod manus dedisti,
quodque etiam ultro gratias egisti. Certe enim, ut scribis, deseremur
ocius a re publica quam a re familiari. Quod vero scribis te cotidie
magis delectare "O Tite, si quid," auges mihi scribendi alacritatem.
Quod Erotem non sine munusculo exspectare te dicis, gaudeo non
fefellisse eam rem opinionem tuam; sed tamen idem σύνταγμα misi ad te
retractatius, et quidem ἀρχέτυπον ipsum crebris locis inculcatum et
refectum. Hunc tu tralatum in macrocollum lege arcano convivis tuis,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 377

may appear superfluous to them—to Oppius at any rate, as I know he is a
great admirer of yours. But just as you please.

As you say you are going to spend the winter in Epirus, I shall take it
kindly if you will come before the time at which you advise me to return
to Italy. Send me letters as often as possible; if on matters of little
importance, by any messenger you can find; but if on important affairs,
send some one of your own.

I will attempt a work in Heracleides' style, if I get safe to
Brundisium. I am sending you my _De Gloria_. Please keep it as usual,
but have select passages marked for Salvius to read when he has an
appropriate party to dinner. I am very pleased with them, and I hope you
will be too. Farewell, and yet again farewell.


                                  III

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Pompeii, July 17_, B.C. _44_]

At last I am answering the letter you sent me after meeting Antony at
Tibur. Well, then, you were wise in giving in and even going so far as
to thank him. For certainly, as you say, we shall be robbed of our
constitution before we are robbed of our private property. So you take
more and more delight in my treatise on Old Age daily. That increases my
energy in writing. You say you expect Eros not to come to you
empty-handed. I am glad you have not been disappointed in the event; but
at the same time I am sending you the same composition more carefully
revised, indeed the original copy, with plenty of additions between the
lines and corrections. Have it copied on large paper and read it
privately to your guests; but, if you love me, do it

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 378

sed, si me amas, hilaris et bene acceptis, ne in me stomachum erumpant,
cum sint tibi irati.

De Cicerone velim ita sit, ut audimus. De Xenone coram cognoscam;
quamquam nihil ab eo arbitror neque indiligenter neque inliberaliter. De
Herode faciam, ut mandas, et ea, quae scribis, ex Saufeio et e Xenone
cognoscam. De Quinto filio gaudeo tibi meas litteras prius a tabellario
meo quam ab ipso redditas; quamquam te nihil fefellisset. Verum tamen —.
Sed exspecto, quid ille tecum, quid tu vicissim, nec dubito, quin suo
more uterque. Sed eas litteras Curium mihi spero redditurum. Qui quidem
etsi per se est amabilis a meque diligitur, tamen accedet magnus cumulus
commendationis tuae.

Litteris tuis satis responsum est; nunc audi, quod, etsi intellego
scribi necesse non esse, scribo tamen. Multa me movent in discessu, in
primis mehercule quod diiungor a te. Movet etiam navigationis labor
alienus non ab aetate solum nostra, verum etiam a dignitate tempusque
discessus subabsurdum. Relinquimus enim pacem, ut ad bellum revertamur,
quodque temporis in praediolis nostris et belle aedificatis et satis
amoenis consumi potuit, in peregrinatione consumimus. Consolantur haec:
aut proderimus aliquid Ciceroni, aut quantum profici possit,
iudicabimus. Deinde tu iam, ut spero, et ut promittis, aderis. Quod
quidem si acciderit, omnia nobis erunt meliora. Maxime autem me angit
ratio reliquorum meorum. Quae quamquam explicata

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 379

when they are in a good temper and have had a good dinner, for I don't
want them to vent on me the anger they feel towards you.

In my son's case I hope things may be as we hear. About Xeno I shall
know when I see him, though I don't suppose he is neglecting his duty or
acting meanly. I will do as you say about Herodes, and will find out
what you mention from Saufeius and Xeno. As for young Quintus, I am glad
my letter was delivered by my messenger sooner than the one he took
himself, though you would not have been taken in anyhow. However—but I
am anxious to hear what he said to you and what you answered, though I
have no doubt you both behaved characteristically. I hope Curius will
deliver that letter to me. Though he is pleasant enough and I like him
myself, still your recommendation will add the crowning grace.

I have answered your letter sufficiently; now hear what I am going to
say, though I know there is no necessity for me to say it. In regard to
my journey I am distressed about many things, the chief being that I am
separated from you. Then again there is the fatigue of the voyage, a
thing unsuitable not only to my age but to my rank too, and the time of
my departure is rather ridiculous. For I am leaving peace to return to
war, and wasting in travelling time that might be spent in my country
houses, which are comfortably built and pleasantly situated. My
consolations are these. I shall either benefit my son or see how much he
can be benefited. Then again, as I hope and as you promise, you will
soon be coming too; and if that happens it will make me far happier. But
the thing that worries me most is the arranging of my balances; for,
though things

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 380

sunt, tamen, quod et Dolabellae nomen in iis est et in attributione mihi
nomina ignota, conturbor, nec me ulla res magis angit ex omnibus. Itaque
non mihi videor errasse, quod ad Balbum scripsi apertius, ut, si quid
tale accidisset, ut non concurrerent nomina, subveniret, meque tibi
etiam mandasse, ut, si quid eius modi accidisset, cum eo communicares.
Quod facies, si tibi videbitur, eoque magis, si proficisceris in Epirum.

Haec ego conscendens e Pompeiano tribus actuariolis decemscalmis. Brutus
erat in Neside etiam nunc, Neapoli Cassius. Ecquid amas Deiotarum et non
amas Hieram? Qui, ut Blesamius venit ad me, cum ei praescriptum esset,
ne quid sine Sexti nostri sententia ageret, neque ad illum neque ad
quemquam nostrum rettulit. Atticam nostram cupio absentem suaviari. Ita
mi dulcis salus visa est per te missa ab illa. Referes igitur ei
plurimam itemque Piliae dicas velim.


                                   IV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano VI Id. Quint. a. 710_]

Ita ut heri tibi narravi vel fortasse hodie (Quintus enim altero die se
aiebat), in Nesida VIII Idus. Ibi Brutus. Quam ille doluit de NONIS
IULIIS! mirifice est conturbatus. Itaque sese scripturum aiebat, ut
venationem eam, quae postridie ludos Apollinares futura est,
proscriberent in III IDUS QUINCTILES. Libo

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 381

have been put straight, I am anxious when I see Dolabella's name among
them, and drafts on people that I do not know among my assets: and that
makes me more uneasy than anything else. So I don't think I was wrong in
applying to Balbus quite openly to assist me, if such a thing should
happen as my debts not coming in properly, and telling him that I had
commissioned you to communicate with him in any such event. Do so, if
you think fit, especially if you are starting for Epirus.

This I have written just as I was embarking from Pompeii with three
ten-oared pinnaces. Brutus is still in Nesis, Cassius at Naples. Can you
like Deiotarus and not like Hieras?[308] When Blesamius came to me
Hieras was commissioned not to do anything without Sextus Peducaeus'
advice, but he never consulted him or any of our friends. I should like
to kiss Attica, far off as she is: I was so pleased with the good wishes
she sent me through you. So please give her my best thanks, and the same
to Pilia.

Footnote 308:

  Hieras and Blesamius were agents of Deiotarus in bribing Antony to
  restore Armenia to him, and apparently were now disowned by him after
  he had succeeded in getting it back.


                                   IV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, July 10_, B.C. _44_]

As I told you yesterday or perhaps to-day—for Quintus said he would take
two days going—I went to Nesis on the 8th: and there was Brutus. How
annoyed he was about the "7th of _July_."[309] It quite upset him. So he
said he would send orders for them to advertise the beast-hunt, which is
to take place on the day after the games to Apollo, as on the "13th of
_Quinctilis_." Libo came in, and he

Footnote 309:

  Cf. _Att._ XVI. 1.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 382

intervenit. Is Philonem, Pompei libertum, et Hilarum, suum libertum,
venisse a Sexto cum litteris ad consules, "sive quo alio nomine sunt."
Earum exemplum nobis legit, si quid videretur. Pauca παρὰ λέξιν,
ceteroqui et satis graviter et non contumaciter. Tantum addi placuit,
quod erat "COSS." solum, ut esset "PRAETT., TRIBB. PL., SENATVI," ne
illi non proferrent eas, quae ad ipsos missae essent. Sextum autem
nuntiant cum una solum legione fuisse Karthagine, eique eo ipso die, quo
oppidum Baream cepisset, nuntiatum esse de Caesare, capto oppido miram
laetitiam commutationemque animorum concursumque undique; sed illum ad
sex legiones, quas in ulteriore reliquisset, revertisse. Ad ipsum autem
Libonem scripsit nihil esse, nisi ad larem suum liceret. Summa
postulatorum, ut omnes exercitus dimittantur, qui ubique sint. Haec fere
de Sexto.

De Buthrotiis undique quaerens nihil reperiebam. Alii concisos
agripetas, alii Plancum acceptis nummis relictis illis aufugisse. Itaque
non video sciturum me, quid eius sit, ni statim aliquid litterarum.

Iter illud Brundisium, de quo dubitabam, sublatum videtur. Legiones enim
adventare dicuntur. Haec autem navigatio habet quasdam suspiciones
periculi. Itaque constituebam uti ὁμοπλοίᾳ. Paratiorem enim offendi
Brutum, quam audiebam. Nam et ipse et Domitius bona plane habet dicrota,
suntque navigia praeterea luculenta Sesti, Buciliani, ceterorum.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 383

told us that Philo, a freedman of Pompey, and Hilarus, one of his own,
had come from Sextus with a letter for the consuls, "or whatever they
call them." He read us a copy to see what we thought of it. There were a
few odd expressions, but in other respects it was sufficiently dignified
and not aggressive. We only thought it better to make an addition of
"Praetors, Tribunes of the People, and Senate" to the simple address to
the "Consuls," for fear they should not publish a letter sent to them.
They say that Sextus has been at Carthage with only one legion, and that
he received the news about Caesar on the very day that he took the town
of Barea. After the capture there were great rejoicings and a change of
sentiment, and people flocked to him from every side, but he returned to
the six legions he had left in lower Spain. He has written to Libo
himself saying it is all nothing to him if he cannot get home. The
upshot of his demands is, that all the armies everywhere should be
disbanded. That is all about Sextus.

I have been making enquiries in every direction about the Buthrotians,
and discover nothing. Some say the land-grabbers were cut to pieces,
others that Plancus pocketed the money and fled, leaving them in the
lurch. So I don't see how I can find out what there is in it, unless I
get a letter at once.

The route to Brundisium, about which I was hesitating, seems to be out
of the question. They say the troops are arriving there. But the voyage
from here has some suspicion of danger, so I have made up my mind to
sail in company with Brutus. I found him better prepared than I had
heard he was. For both he and Domitius have quite good two-banked
galleys, and there are also some good ships belonging

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 384

Nam Cassi classem, quae plane bella est, non numero ultra fretum. Illud
est mihi submolestum, quod parum Brutus properare videtur. Primum
confectorum ludorum nuntios exspectat; deinde, quantum intellego, tarde
est navigaturus consistens in locis pluribus. Tamen arbitror esse
commodius tarde navigare quam omnino non navigare; et, si, cum
processerimus, exploratiora videbuntur, etesiis utemur.


                                   V

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano VII Id. Quint. a. 710_]

Tuas iam litteras Brutus exspectabat. Cui quidem ego non novum attuleram
de Tereo Acci. Ille Brutum putabat. Sed tamen rumoris nescio quid
adflaverat commissione Graecorum frequentiam non fuisse; quod quidem me
minime fefellit; scis enim, quid ego de Graecis ludis existimem.

Nunc audi, quod pluris est quam omnia. Quintus fuit mecum dies
complures, et, si ego cuperem, ille vel plures fuisset; sed, quam diu
fuit, incredibile est, quam me in omni genere delectarit, in eoque
maxime, in quo minime satis faciebat. Sic enim commutatus est totus et
scriptis meis quibusdam, quae in manibus habebam, et adsiduitate
orationis et praeceptis, ut tali animo in rem publicam, quali nos
volumus, futurus sit. Hoc cum mihi non modo confirmasset, sed

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 385

to Sestus, Bucilianus, and others. For I don't count on Cassius' fleet,
which is quite a fine one, beyond the straits of Sicily. There is one
point that annoys me a little, Brutus seems in no hurry. First he is
waiting for news of the completion of his games; then, so far as I can
understand, he is going to sail slowly, stopping at several places.
Still I think it will be better to sail slowly than not to sail at all;
and if, when we have got some distance, things seem clearer, we shall
take advantage of the Etesian winds.


                                   V

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, July 9_, B.C. _44_]

Brutus is expecting a letter from you. The news I brought him about
Accius' _Tereus_ was no news. He thought it was the _Brutus_.[310] There
had, however, been some breath of rumour that at the opening of the
Greek games the audience was small, at which, indeed, I was not at all
surprised; for you know what I think of Greek games.

Footnote 310:

  Cf. _Att._ XVI. 2. Not being present Brutus had supposed it was the
  play called _Brutus_, whereas it was the _Tereus_.

Now hear the most important point of all. Quintus has been with me
several days, and, if I had desired, he would have stayed longer; but,
so far as his visit went, you would not believe how pleased I was with
him in every way, and especially in that in which I used most to
disapprove of him. For he is so totally changed, partly by some works of
mine, which I have in hand, and partly by my continual advice and
exhortation, that he will in the future be as loyal as we could wish to
the constitution. After he had not only asseverated this, but convinced
me

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 386

etiam persuasisset, egit mecum accurate multis verbis, tibi ut sponderem
se dignum et te et nobis futurum; neque se postulare, ut statim
crederes, sed, cum ipse perspexisses, tum ut se amares. Quodnisi fidem
mihi fecisset, iudicassemque hoc, quod dico, firmum fore, non fecissem
id, quod dicturus sum. Duxi enim mecum adulescentem ad Brutum. Sic ei
probatum est, quod ad te scribo, ut ipse crediderit, me sponsorem
accipere noluerit, eumque laudans amicissime mentionem tui fecerit,
complexus osculatusque dimiserit. Quam ob rem, etsi magis est, quod
gratuler tibi, quam quod te rogem, tamen etiam rogo, ut, si quae minus
antea propter infirmitatem aetatis constanter ab eo fieri videbantur, ea
iudices illum abiecisse, mihique credas multum allaturam, vel plurimum
potius, ad illius iudicium confirmandum auctoritatem tuam.

Bruto cum saepe iniecissem de ὁμοπλοίᾳ, non perinde, atque ego putaram,
arripere visus est. Existimabam μετεωρότερον esse, et hercule erat et
maxime de ludis. At mihi, cum ad villam redissem, Cn. Lucceius, qui
multum utitur Bruto, narravit illum valde morari, non tergiversantem,
sed exspectantem, si qui forte casus. Itaque dubito, an Venusiam tendam
et ibi exspectem de legionibus. Si aberunt, ut quidam arbitrantur,
Hydruntem, si neutrum erit ἀσφαλές, eodem revertar. Iocari me putas?
Moriar, si quisquam me tenet praeter te. Etenim circumspice, sed
antequam erubesco. O dies in auspiciis Lepidi

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 387

of it, he was very pressing for me to go bail to you that he will come
up to your and our expectations for the future; and he did not ask you
to believe this at once, but that you should restore your affection to
him, when you had seen it for yourself. If he had not convinced me of
it, and I did not think that what I am saying is trustworthy, I should
not have done what I am going to tell you. I took the young man with me
to Brutus, and he was so convinced of what I mention that he believed it
on his own account, refusing to hold me sponsor for Quintus. He praised
him and mentioned you in the most friendly way, and dismissed him with
an embrace and a kiss. So, although there is more reason for
congratulating you than asking favours of you, still I do ask you, if
you have regarded his actions up to now as showing some of the
flightiness of youth, to believe that he has got rid of that, and to
trust me that your influence will contribute much, or rather everything,
towards making his decision permanent.

I have frequently thrown out a hint to Brutus about sailing with him,
but he does not seem to jump at it as I thought he would. He seemed to
me rather distrait, and indeed he was, especially about the games. But
when I got back home, Lucceius, who is very intimate with him, said he
was hesitating a good deal, not because he has changed his mind, but in
the hope that something may turn up. So I am wondering whether to make
for Venusia and there await news of the troops. If they are not there,
as some think, I shall go to Hydrus; if neither road is safe, I will
come back here. Do you think I am joking? Upon my life you are the only
person who keeps me here. Just look round you, but do it before I
blush.[311] Lepidus' choice of his day

Footnote 311:

  Possibly there is some corruption in the text here, as the remark
  seems senseless.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 388

lepide descriptos et apte ad consilium reditus nostri! Magna ῥοπὴ ad
proficiscendum in tuis litteris. Atque utinam te illic! Sed ut conducere
putabis.

Nepotis epistulam exspecto. Cupidus ille meorum? qui ea, quibus maxime
γαυριῶ, legenda non putet. Et ais "μετ' ἀμύμονα"! Tu vero "ἀμύμων," ille
quidem "ἄμβροτος." Mearum epistularum nulla est συναγωγή; sed habet Tiro
instar septuaginta; et quidem sunt a te quaedam sumendae. Eas ego
oportet perspiciam, corrigam. Tum denique edentur.


                                   VI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Vibone VIII K. Sext. a. 710_]

Ego adhuc (perveni enim Vibonem ad Siccam) magis commode quam strenue
navigavi; remis enim magnam partem, prodromi nulli. Illud satis
opportune, duo sinus fuerunt, quos tramitti oporteret, Paestanus et
Vibonensis. Utrumque pedibus aequis tramisimus. Veni igitur ad Siccam
octavo die e Pompeiano, cum unum diem Veliae constitissem. Ubi quidem
fui sane libenter apud Talnam nostrum, nec potui accipi, illo absente
praesertim, liberalius. VIIII Kal. igitur ad Siccam. Ibi tamquam domi
meae scilicet. Itaque obduxi posterum diem. Sed putabam,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 389

of inauguration is as happy as his name, and fits excellently with my
plan for returning. Your letter supplies a strong incentive for going. I
only wish you were there: but that must be as you think best for
yourself.

I am expecting a letter from Nepos. Does he really want my books, when
he thinks the subjects I am keenest on not worth reading. You call him
an Achilles to your Ajax.[312] No, you are the Achilles and he is one of
the immortals. There is no collection of my letters, but Tiro has about
seventy, and some can be got from you. Those I ought to see and correct,
and then they may be published.

Footnote 312:

  Cf. _Odyssey_ XI. 169, where Ajax is said to rank next after "the
  blameless son of Peleus" (μετ' ἀμύμονα Πηλείωνα).


                                   VI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Vibo, July 25_, B.C. _44_]

I have got as far as Sicca's house at Vibo, and at present I have taken
it easy and not exerted myself. We have rowed most of the way, as there
have been none of the usual north winds.[313] That was rather lucky, as
there were two bays to cross, that of Paestum and that of Vibo. We
crossed both with the wind behind us.[314] So I got to Sicca's place
eight days after leaving Pompeii, having stopped one day at Velia. There
I stayed at Talna's house very enjoyably, and I could not have been more
liberally entertained, especially as he was away. So I got to Sicca on
the 24th, and here I am quite at home. So I have stayed a day longer
than I meant. But I think, when I get to

Footnote 313:

  North-north-east winds, called "fore-runners," because they usually
  prevailed for eight days before the rising of the Dog-star.

Footnote 314:

  The _pedes_ were ropes attached to the sail to set it to the wind.
  Both would be let out to an equal length when sailing before the wind.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 390

[Sidenote: _Odyssey_, iii. 169]

cum Regium venissem, fore ut illic "δολιχὸν πλόον ὁρμαίνοντες"
cogitaremus, corbitane Patras an actuariolis ad Leucopetras Tarentinorum
atque inde Corcyram, et, si oneraria, statimne freto an Syracusis. Hac
super re scribam ad te Regio.

Mehercule, mi Attice, saepe mecum:

                     "Ἡ δεῦρ' ὁδός σοι τί δύναται;"

Cur ego tecum non sum? cur ocellos Italiae, villulas meas, non video?
Sed id satis superque, tecum me non esse, quid fugientem? periculumne?
At id nunc quidem, nisi fallor, nullum est. Ad ipsum enim revocat me
auctoritas tua; scribis enim in caelum ferri profectionem meam, sed ita,
si ante K. Ianuar. redeam; quod quidem certe enitar. Malo enim vel cum
timore domi esse quam sine timore Athenis tuis. Sed tamen perspice, quo
ista vergant, mihique aut scribe, aut, quod multo malim, adfer ipse.
Haec hactenus.

Illud velim in bonam partem accipias me agere tecum, quod tibi maiori
curae sciam esse quam ipsi mihi. Nomina mea, per deos, expedi, exsolve.
Bella reliqua reliqui; sed opus est diligentia, coheredibus pro Cluviano
Kal. Sextil. persolutum ut sit. Cum Publilio quo modo agendum sit,
videbis. Non debet urgere, quoniam iure non utimur. Sed tamen ei quoque
satis fieri plane volo. Terentiae vero quid ego dicam? Etiam ante diem,
si potes. Quin, si, ut spero, celeriter in Epirum, hoc, quod satisdato
debeo,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 391

Regium, there, being "on a far voyage bent," I shall have to consider
whether to proceed by a merchant vessel to Patrae or by packet-boats to
Tarentine Leucopetra, and thence to Corcyra; and, if by a merchant ship,
whether direct from the Sicilian strait or from Syracuse. On this point
I will write to you from Regium.

Upon my word, Atticus, I often say to myself: "Why, what avails thee all
thy journey here?"[315] Why am not I with you? Why may I not see my
country houses, the jewels of Italy? But that alone is enough and more
than enough, that I am not with you. And what am I fleeing from? Danger?
Nay, unless I am mistaken, there is no danger now. For it is precisely
at the hour of danger that you bid me come back. For you say my
departure is praised to the skies, provided I return by the end of the
year; and that I will certainly strive to do. For I had rather be at
home in fear and trembling, than in your loved Athens without a fear.
However, keep your eye on the trend of events, and write to me, or what
I should much prefer, bring the news yourself. Enough of this.

Footnote 315:

  A verse from an unknown author, quoted in a fuller form in _Att._ XV.
  11.

Please take my next request in good part. I know you devote more care to
it than I do myself. For mercy's sake keep my accounts clear and pay my
debts. I have left a handsome balance; but it requires care to see to
the payment of my fellow-heirs for the Cluvian property on the 1st of
August. You will see how to manage about Publilius. He ought not to be
pressing, as I am not insisting upon my legal rights. Still I should
much like him also to be satisfied. As to Terentia, what am I to say?
Pay her even before the proper date, if you can. But if, as I hope, you
are coming soon to Epirus, pray make

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 392

peto a te ut ante provideas planeque expedias et solutum relinquas. Sed
de his satis, metuoque, ne tu nimium putes.

Nunc neglegentiam meam cognosce. "De gloria" librum ad te misi. At in eo
prohoemium idem est quod in Academico tertio. Id evenit ob eam rem, quod
habeo volumen prohoemiorum. Ex eo eligere soleo, cum aliquod σύγγραμμα
institui. Itaque iam in Tusculano, qui non meminissem me abusum isto
prohoemio, conieci id in eum librum, quem tibi misi. Cum autem in navi
legerem Academicos, adgnovi erratum meum. Itaque statim novum prohoemium
exaravi et tibi misi. Tu illud desecabis, hoc adglutinabis. Piliae
salutem dices et Atticae, deliciis atque amoribus meis.


                                  VII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scripsit navigans ad Pompeianum XIV K. Sept. a. 710_]

VIII Idus Sextil. cum a Leucopetra profectus (inde enim tramittebam)
stadia circiter CCC processissem, reiectus sum austro vehementi ad
eandem Leucopetram. Ibi cum ventum exspectarem (erat enim villa Valeri
nostri, ut familiariter essem et libenter), Regini quidam illustres
homines eo venerunt Roma sane recentes, in iis Bruti nostri hospes, qui
Brutum Neapoli reliquisset. Haec adferebant, edictum Bruti et Cassi, et
fore frequentem senatum Kalendis, a Bruto et Cassio litteras missas ad
consulares et praetorios,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 393

arrangements first for any bills I have put my name to, and put affairs
straight and leave them paid. But of this enough, and I fear you may
think too much.

Now I must confess my carelessness. I sent you the work _On Glory_. But
the preface to it is the same as that to the third book of the
_Academics_. That is due to my having a volume of prefaces, from which I
select one when I have begun a composition. So, when I was at Tusculum,
forgetting I had used that preface, I put it into the book I sent you.
But when I was reading the _Academics_ on the boat I noticed my mistake.
So I dashed off a new preface at once, and have sent it to you. Please
cut the other off and glue this on. Pay my respects to Pilia and to my
pet and darling Attica.


                                  VII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _On ship-board on the way to Pompeii, Aug. 19_, B.C. _44_]

When I had started from Leucopetra—for that was where I began my
crossing—on the sixth of August and gone some forty miles, I was driven
back to Leucopetra again by a strong south wind. While I was waiting
there for the wind—our friend Valerius has a house there, so I was at
home and enjoying myself—there came some men of mark of Regium, fresh
from Rome, among them a guest of our friend Brutus, who said he had left
Brutus at Naples. They brought an edict of Brutus and Cassius and news
that there would be a full meeting of the House on the first of the
month and that a letter had been sent by Brutus and Cassius to the
ex-consuls

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 394

ut adessent, rogare. Summam spem nuntiabant fore ut Antonius cederet,
res conveniret, nostri Romam redirent. Addebant etiam me desiderari,
subaccusari.

Quae cum audissem, sine ulla dubitatione abieci consilium profectionis,
quo mehercule ne antea quidem delectabar. Lectis vero tuis litteris
admiratus equidem sum te tam vehementer sententiam commutasse, sed non
sine causa arbitrabar. Etsi, quamvis non fueris suasor et impulsor
profectionis meae, adprobator certe fuisti, dum modo Kal. Ian. Romae
essem. Ita fiebat, ut, dum minus periculi videretur, abessem, in flammam
ipsam venirem. Sed haec, etiamsi non prudenter, tamen ἀνεμέσητα sunt,
primum quod de mea sententia acta sunt, deinde, etiamsi te auctore, quid
debet, qui consilium dat, praestare praeter fidem? Illud admirari satis
non potui, quod scripsisti his verbis: "Bene igitur tu, qui εὐθανασίαν,
bene! relinque patriam." An ego relinquebam aut tibi tum relinquere
videbar? Tu id non modo non inhibebas, verum etiam adprobabas. Graviora,
quae restant. "Velim σχόλιον aliquod elimes ad me oportuisse te istuc
facere." Itane, mi Attice? defensione eget meum factum, praesertim apud
te, qui id mirabiliter adprobasti? Ego vero istum ἀπολογισμὸν
συντάξομαι, sed ad eorum aliquem, quibus invitis et

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 395

and ex-praetors asking them to be present. They said there were great
hopes that Antony might yield, some agreement be arrived at, and our
friends allowed to return to Rome; and they added that I was missed and
people were inclined to blame me.

When I heard that, I had no hesitation about giving up my idea of going
away, which to be sure I had never fancied even before that: and when I
read your letter, I was certainly surprised that you had so utterly
changed your opinion; but there seemed to me to be good reason for it.
However, though it was not you who persuaded and urged me to go, you
certainly approved of my going, if I got back by the end of the year.
That would have meant, that, when there was little danger, I should have
been away, and should return when it was in full blaze. But that,
although it was not a counsel of prudence, I have no right to resent,
first because it happened by my own wish, and secondly, even if you had
advised me, an adviser need not guarantee anything but his sincerity.
What did astonish me beyond measure was that you should use the words:
"A fine thing for you, who talk of a noble death, a fine thing, i'
faith. Go, desert your country." Was I deserting it, or did you at the
time think I was deserting it? You not only raised no finger against it,
you even approved of it. The rest is even more severe: "I wish you would
write me an explanatory note showing that it was your duty to do it?"
So, my dear Atticus? Does my action need defending, especially to you,
who expressed strong approval? Yes, I will write a defence, but for some
of those who opposed my going and spoke against it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 396

dissuadentibus profectus sum. Etsi quid iam opus est σχολίῳ? si
perseverassem, opus fuisset. "At hoc ipsum non constanter." Nemo doctus
umquam (multa autem de hoc genere scripta sunt) mutationem consilii
inconstantiam dixit esse. Deinceps igitur haec: "Nam, si a Phaedro
nostro esses, expedita excusatio esset; nunc quid respondemus?" Ergo id
erat meum factum, quod Catoni probare non possem? flagitii scilicet
plenum et dedecoris. Utinam a primo ita tibi esset visum! tu mihi, sicut
esse soles, fuisses Cato. Extremum illud vel molestissimum: "Nam Brutus
noster silet," hoc est: non audet hominem id aetatis monere. Aliud nihil
habeo, quod ex iis a te verbis significari putem, et hercule ita est.
Nam, XVI Kal. Sept. cum venissem Veliam, Brutus audivit; erat enim cum
suis navibus apud Heletem fluvium citra Veliam mil. pass. III. Pedibus
ad me statim. Dei immortales, quam valde ille reditu vel potius
reversione mea laetatus effudit illa omnia, quae tacuerat! ut recordarer
illud tuum "Nam Brutus noster silet." Maxime autem dolebat me Kal. Sext.
in senatu non fuisse. Pisonem ferebat in caelum; se autem laetari, quod
effugissem duas maximas vituperationes, unam, quam itinere faciendo me
intellegebam suscipere, desperationis ac relictionis rei publicae
(flentes mecum vulgo querebantur, quibus de meo celeri reditu non
probabam), alteram, de qua Brutus, et qui una erant (multi autem erant),
laetabantur,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 397

Though what need is there of an explanatory note? If I had gone on,
there would have been. "But coming back is not consistent." No
philosopher ever called a change of plan inconsistency, though there has
been a good deal written on the point. So you add: "If you were a
follower of our friend Phaedrus,[316] one would have a defence ready:
but, as it is, what answer can one give?" So my deed was one Cato would
not approve of, was it? Of course then it was criminal and disgraceful.
Would to heaven you had thought so at first; you should have been my
Cato, as you usually are. Your last cut is the most unkind of all: "For
our friend Brutus holds his peace," that is to say, he does not dare
remonstrate with a man of my age. I see no other meaning that I can
attach to your words, and no doubt that is it. For on the 17th, when I
reached Velia, Brutus heard of it—he was with his boats on the river
Heles about three miles from Velia; and he came at once on foot to see
me. Great heavens, how he let out all his pent-up silence in joy at my
return or rather my turning back. I could not help thinking of your "Our
friend Brutus holds his peace." But what he regretted most was that I
was not in the House on the first of August. Piso he lauded to the
skies: and he expressed his delight that I had escaped two grounds for
reproach. One of these was that of despairing and abandoning the
country—and that I knew I might incur in undertaking the voyage; for
many had complained to me with tears in their eyes, and I could not
convince them of my speedy return. The other point that rejoiced Brutus
and those who were with him—and there

Footnote 316:

  An Epicurean philosopher at Athens; cf. _Ad Fam._ XIII. 1.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 398

quod eam vituperationem effugissem, me existimari ad Olympia. Hoc vero
nihil turpius quovis rei publicae tempore, sed hoc ἀναπολόγητον. Ego
vero austro gratias miras, qui me a tanta infamia averterit.

Reversionis has speciosas causas habes, iustas illas quidem et magnas;
sed nulla iustior, quam quod tu idem aliis litteris: "Provide, si cui
quid debetur, ut sit, unde par pari respondeatur. Mirifica enim
δυσχρηστία est propter metum armorum." In freto medio hanc epistulam
legi, ut, quid possem providere, in mentem mihi non veniret, nisi ut
praesens me ipse defenderem. Sed haec hactenus; reliqua coram.

Antoni edictum legi a Bruto et horum contra scriptum praeclare; sed,
quid ista edicta valeant aut quo spectent, plane non video. Nec ego
nunc, ut Brutus censebat, istuc ad rem publicam capessendam venio. Quid
enim fieri potest? Num quis Pisoni est adsensus? num rediit ipse
postridie? Sed abesse hanc aetatem longe a sepulcro negant oportere.

Sed, obsecro te, quid est, quod audivi de Bruto? Piliam πειράζεσθαι
παραλύσει te scripsisse aiebat Valde sum commotus. Etsi idem te scribere
sperare melius. Ita plane velim, et ei dicas plurimam salutem et
suavissimae Atticae. Haec scripsi navigans, cum prope Pompeianum
accederem, XIIII Kal.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 399

were a lot of them—was that I had escaped the reproach of being thought
to be going to the Olympian games. Nothing could be more disgraceful
than that in any political circumstances, but at the present time it
would be inexcusable. I of course felt very grateful to the south wind,
which had saved me from such infamy.

There you have the ostensible reasons for my return; and they are good
and sufficient reasons too; but none of them is better than one you
mention in your letter: "If you owe anything to anyone, take measures to
provide yourself with the means to pay each his due. For the money
market is wonderfully tight owing to fear of war." I was in the middle
of the straits when I read this letter, and I could not think of any way
of taking measures, unless I came to look after it myself. But enough of
this; more when we meet.

I got a sight of Antony's edict from Brutus, and of our friends'
magnificent answer; but I don't quite see the use or the object of these
edicts. Nor have I come as Brutus thought, to take part in the
management of affairs. For what can be done? Did anybody agree with
Piso? Did he himself come back the next day? But, as the saying goes, a
man of my time of life ought not to go far from his grave.

But for mercy's sake what is this that I hear from Brutus! He says you
told him Pilia had had an attack of paralysis. I am very much disturbed
about it, though he tells me you say you hope she is better. I sincerely
hope she is; give her and darling Attica my best regards. This I have
written on ship-board, as I was getting near to Pompeii, Aug. 19.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 400


                                  VIII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano IV Non. Nov. a. 710_]

Cum sciam, quo die venturus sim, faciam, ut scias. Impedimenta
exspectanda sunt, quae Anagnia veniunt, et familia aegra est. Kal.
vesperi litterae mihi ab Octaviano. Magna molitur. Veteranos, qui sunt
Casilini et Calatiae, perduxit ad suam sententiam. Nec mirum, quingenos
denarios dat. Cogitat reliquas colonias obire. Plane hoc spectat, ut se
duce bellum geratur cum Antonio. Itaque video paucis diebus nos in armis
fore. Quem autem sequamur? Vide nomen, vide aetatem. Atque a me
postulat, primum ut clam conloquatur mecum vel Capuae vel non longe a
Capua. Puerile hoc quidem, si id putat clam fieri posse. Docui per
litteras id nec opus esse nec fieri posse. Misit ad me Caecinam quendam
Volaterranum familiarem suum; qui haec pertulit, Antonium cum legione
Alaudarum ad urbem pergere, pecunias municipiis imperare, legionem sub
signis ducere. Consultabat, utrum Romam cum CIↃ CIↃ CIↃ veteranorum
proficisceretur an Capuam teneret et Antonium venientem excluderet, an
iret ad tres legiones Macedonicas, quae iter secundum mare Superum
faciunt; quas sperat suas esse. Eae congiarium ab Antonio accipere
noluerunt, ut hic quidem narrat, et ei convicium grave fecerunt
contionantemque reliquerunt. Quid quaeris? ducem se profitetur

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 401


                                  VIII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, Nov. 2_, B.C. _44_]

When I know what day I shall arrive, I will let you know. I must wait
for my heavy baggage, which is coming from Anagnia, and there is illness
in my household. On the evening of the 1st I got a letter from Octavian.
He is setting about a heavy task. He has brought over the veterans, who
are at Casilinum and Calatia, to his views; and no wonder, when he is
giving them £20[317] apiece. He thinks of visiting the other colonies.
Obviously his idea is a war with Antony under his leadership. So I see
that before long we shall be in arms. But whom are we to follow? Look at
his name, and at his age. And his first request of me is that I should
meet him secretly at Capua or somewhere near Capua. That is quite
childish, if he thinks it can be done secretly. I have told him by
letter that there is no necessity for it and no possibility of it. He
sent me one Caecina of Volaterra, an intimate friend of his, who brought
this news, that Antony is making for Rome with the legion Alauda,
raising a forced contribution from towns, and marching with his soldiers
under colours. He asked my advice about setting out for Rome with 3,000
veterans or holding Capua and intercepting Antony's advance, or going to
the three Macedonian legions, which are making for the northern
Adriatic. Those he hopes are on his side; they refused to take Antony's
bounty, or so he says, heaped insults on him and left him still
haranguing. Of course, he offers himself as our leader, and thinks we
ought not to fail

Footnote 317:

  500 denarii.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 402

nec nos sibi putat deesse oportere. Equidem suasi, ut Romam pergeret.
Videtur enim mihi et plebeculam urbanam, et, si fidem fecerit, etiam
bonos viros secum habiturus. O Brute, ubi es? quantam εὐκαιρίαν amittis!
Non equidem hoc divinavi, sed aliquid tale putavi fore. Nunc tuum
consilium exquiro. Romamne venio an hic maneo an Arpinum (ἀσφάλειαν
habet is locus) fugiam? Romam, ne desideremur, si quid actum videbitur.
Hoc igitur explica. Numquam in maiore ἀπορίᾳ fui.


                                   IX

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano prid. Non. Nov. a. 710_]

Binae uno die mihi litterae ab Octaviano, nunc quidem, ut Romam statim
veniam; velle se rem agere per senatum. Cui ego non posse senatum ante
K. Ianuar., quod quidem ita credo. Ille autem addit "consilio tuo." Quid
multa? ille urget, ego autem σκήπτομαι. Non confido aetati, ignoro, quo
animo. Nil sine Pansa tuo volo. Vereor, ne valeat Antonius, nec a mari
discedere libet, et metuo, ne quae ἀριστεία me absente. Varroni quidem
displicet consilium pueri, mihi non. Si firmas copias habet, Brutum
habere potest, et rem gerit palam. Centuriat Capuae, dinumerat. Iam
iamque video bellum. Ad haec rescribe. Tabellarium meum Kalend. Roma
profectum sine tuis litteris miror.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 403

him. I advised that he should make for Rome. For it seems to me he ought
to have the city rabble, and, if he succeeds in inspiring them with
confidence, even the loyalists on his side. O Brutus, where are you?
What a golden opportunity you are missing! I never foresaw this, but I
thought something of the kind would happen. Now, I want your advice.
Shall I come to Rome, or stay here, or flee to Arpinum, which would be a
harbour of refuge? Rome I think, for fear I be missed, if people think a
blow has been struck. Read me this riddle. I never was in a greater
quandary.


                                   IX

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, Nov. 4_, B.C. _44_]

Two letters on one day from Octavian, now asking me to come to Rome at
once, as he wishes to act through the Senate. I told him I did not think
the Senate could meet before January, and I really believe that is so.
But he adds "with your advice." In short he is pressing, while I am
temporizing. I do not trust his age: I do not know his disposition. I do
not want to do anything without your friend Pansa's advice. I am afraid
Antony may succeed, and I don't like going away from the sea, and I fear
some great deed may be done in my absence. Varro, for his part, dislikes
the boy's plan; I do not. If he can trust his army, he can have Brutus,
and he is playing his game openly. He is dividing his men into companies
at Capua, and paying over their bounty money. I see war close upon us.
Please answer this letter. I am surprised my messenger left Rome on the
1st without a letter from you.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 404


                                   X

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Sinuessano VI Id. Nov. a. 710_]

VII Id. veni ad me in Sinuessanum. Eodem die vulgo loquebantur Antonium
mansurum esse Casilini. Itaque mutavi consilium; statueram enim recta
Appia Romam. Facile me ille esset adsecutus. Aiunt enim eum Caesarina
uti celeritate. Verti igitur me a Menturnis Arpinum versus.
Constitueram, ut V Idus aut Aquini manerem aut in Arcano. Nunc, mi
Attice, tota mente incumbe in hanc curam; magna enim res est. Tria sunt
autem, maneamne Arpini an propius accedam an veniam Romam. Quod
censueris, faciam. Sed quam primum. Avide exspecto tuas litteras. VI
Idus mane in Sinuessano.


                                   XI

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano Non. Nov. a. 710_]

[Sidenote: _Iliad_, xx. 308]

Nonis accepi a te duas epistulas, quarum alteram Kal. dederas, alteram
pridie. Igitur prius ad superiorem. Nostrum opus tibi probari laetor; ex
quo ἄνθη ipsa posuisti. Quae mihi florentiora sunt visa tuo iudicio;
cerulas enim tuas miniatulas illas extimescebam. De Sicca ita est, ut
scribis: ab[318] asta ea aegre me tenui. Itaque perstringam sine ulla
contumelia Siccae aut Septimiae, tantum ut sciant "παῖδες παίδων"

Footnote 318:

  ab _added by Reid_: asta (=hasta, sensu obscoeno; cf. _Priapea_, 43,
  1).

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 405


                                   X

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Sinuessa, Nov. 8_, B.C. _44_]

On the 7th I reached my house at Sinuessa, and on that day it was
generally said that Antony was going to stay at Casilinum. So I changed
my plan, for I had intended to go straight on by the Appian way to Rome.
He would easily have caught me up, for they say he travels as fast as
Caesar. So from Menturnae I am turning off towards Arpinum, and I have
made up my mind to stay at Aquinum or in Arcanum on the 9th. Now, my
dear Atticus, throw yourself heart and soul into this question, for it
is an important matter. There are three things open to me: to stay at
Arpinum, to come nearer to Rome, or to go to Rome. What you advise, I
will do? But answer at once. I am eagerly expecting a letter from you.
Sinuessa, Nov. 8 in the morning.


                                   XI

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, Nov. 5_, B.C. _44_]

On the 5th I received two letters from you, one dated the first, the
other a day earlier. So I am answering the earlier first. I am glad you
like my book, from which you quoted the very gems; and they seemed to me
all the more sparkling for your judgment on them. For I was afraid of
those red pencils[319] of yours. As for Sicca, it is as you say: I could
hardly hold myself in about Antony's lust. So I will touch on it lightly
without any opprobrium for Sicca and Septimia, and only let our
children's

Footnote 319:

  Cf. _Att._ XV. 14, 4.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 406

sine φαλλῷ Luciliano eum ex C. Fadi filia liberos habuisse. Atque utinam
eum diem videam, cum ista oratio ita libere vagetur, ut etiam in Siccae
domum introeat! Sed "illo tempore opus est, quod fuit illis III viris."
Moriar, nisi facete! Tu vero leges Sexto eiusque iudicium mihi
perscribes. "Εἷς ἐμοὶ μύριοι." Caleni interventum et Calvenae cavebis.

Quod vereris, ne ἀδόλεσχος mihi tu, quis minus? Cui, ut Aristophani
Archilochi iambus, sic epistula tua longissima quaeque optima videtur.
Quod me admones, tu vero etiamsi reprenderes, non modo facile paterer,
sed etiam laetarer, quippe cum in reprensione sit prudentia cum
εὐμενεία. Ita libenter ea corrigam, quae a te animadversa sunt, "eodem
iure quo Rubriana" potius quam "quo Scipionis," et de laudibus
Dolabellae deruam cumulum. Ac tamen est isto loco bella, ut mihi
videtur, εἰρωνεία, quod eum ter contra cives in acie. Illud etiam malo:
"indignissimum est hunc vivere" quam "quid indignius?" Πεπλογραφίαν
Varronis tibi probari non moleste fero;

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 407

children know, without taking Lucilian licence, that Antony had children
by a daughter of Fadius. I only wish I could see the day when my second
_Philippic_ could be sufficiently freely circulated to enter even
Sicca's door. "But we want back the days of freedom under the
triumvirs."[320] Upon my life that was a neat touch of yours. Please
read my book to Sextus and let me know his opinion. I would take his
word against all the world. Keep your eyes open for the appearance of
Calenus and Calvena.

Footnote 320:

  The point of this sentence is not obvious. The translation follows
  Watson, who suggests that the pleasantry lies in calling the days of
  the triumvirate free in comparison with the date at which Cicero was
  writing. Other suggestions are (_a_) that there is a play on the
  triumvirate and the fact that Caesar and Pompey each had three wives;
  (_b_) that Septimia had three husbands; or (_c_) that it refers to
  some earlier date, possibly Cicero's consulate, when Fadia had three
  lovers. (Cf. Gurlitt, in _Philologus_, LVII. (1898) pp. 403-8).

You fear I may think you a gas-bag. Who is less of one? I am like
Aristophanes[321] with Archilochus' iambics—the longest letter of yours
ever seems the best to me. As for your giving me advice, why, if you
found fault with me, I should not only put up with it cheerfully, but
even be glad of it, since in your fault-finding there is both wisdom and
kindly purpose. So I will willingly correct the point you mention, and
write "by the same right as you did the property of Rubrius" instead of
"the property of Scipio";[322] and I will take the pinnacle off my
praises of Dolabella. And yet to my thinking there is fine irony in the
passage where I say he had thrice stood up in arms against his
fellow-citizens.[323] Again I prefer your "it is most unjust that such a
man should live" to "what can be more unjust?"[324] I am not sorry to
hear you praise the _Peplographia_[325]

Footnote 321:

  The Alexandrine grammarian, not the comic poet.

Footnote 322:

  2 _Phil._ 103, where Cicero accuses Antony of obtaining possession of
  property by underhand means.

Footnote 323:

  2 _Phil._ 75, with Caesar in Thessaly, Africa, and Spain.

Footnote 324:

  2 _Phil._ 86. But the original reading is still found in our MSS.

Footnote 325:

  A "book of worthies," so-called from the sacred robe, embroidered with
  mythological and historical figures, offered once a year to Athene at
  Athens. The book was possibly identical with that generally known as
  the _Hebdomades sive Imagines_, but that is doubtful.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 408

a quo adhuc Ἡρακλείδειον illud non abstuli. Quod me hortaris ad
scribendum, amice tu quidem, sed me scito agere nihil aliud. Gravedo tua
mihi molesta est. Quaeso, adhibe, quam soles diligentiam. "O Tite" tibi
prodesse laetor. "Anagnini" sunt Mustela ταξιάρχης et Laco, qui plurimum
bibit. Librum, quem rogas, perpoliam et mittam.

Haec ad posteriorem. "Τὰ περὶ τοῦ καθήκοντος," quatenus Panaetius,
absolvi duobus. Illius tres sunt; sed, cum initio divisisset ita, tria
genera exquirendi officii esse, unum, cum deliberemus, honestum an turpe
sit, alterum, utile an inutile, tertium, cum haec inter se pugnare
videantur, quo modo iudicandum sit, qualis causa Reguli, redire
honestum, manere utile, de duobus primis praeclare disseruit, de tertio
pollicetur se deinceps, sed nihil scripsit. Eum locum Posidonius
persecutus est. Ego autem et eius librum accersivi et ad Athenodorum
Calvum scripsi, ut ad me τὰ κεφάλαια mitteret; quae exspecto. Quem velim
cohortere et roges, ut quam primum. In eo est περὶ τοῦ κατὰ περίστασιν
καθήκοντος. Quod de inscriptione quaeris, non dubito, quin καθῆκον
"officium" sit, nisi quid tu aliud; sed inscriptio plenior "de
officiis." Προσφωνῶ autem Ciceroni filio. Visum est non ἀνοίκειον.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 409

of Varro; I have not yet managed to get the book in the style of
Heracleides from him. You exhort me to go on writing. That is friendly
of you; but let me tell you I do nothing else. I am sorry to hear of
your cold. Please take as much care as usual of it. I am glad my book
_On Old Age_[326] does you good. The "men of Anagnia"[327] are Mustela,
the swashbuckler, and Laco, the champion toper. The book you ask for I
will polish up and send.

Footnote 326:

  _O Tite_ are the opening words of the _De Senectute_.

Footnote 327:

  2 _Phil._ 106. The names have been inserted, as they are given in our
  MSS.

Now for the second letter. The _De Officiis_, so far as Panaetius is
concerned, I have finished in two books. He has three: but, though at
the beginning he makes a three-fold division of cases in which duty has
to be determined, one when the question is between right or wrong,
another when it is between expediency and inexpediency, and the third,
how we are to decide when it is a conflict between duty and
expediency—for example, in Regulus' case to return would be right, to
stay expedient—he treated of the first two brilliantly; the third he
promises to add, but never wrote it. Posidonius took up that topic: but
I have ordered his book and written to Athenodorus Calvus to send me an
analysis of it, and that I am expecting. I wish you would spur him on
and beg him to let me have it as soon as possible. In it duties under
given circumstances are handled. As to your query about the title, I
have no doubt that καθῆκον (duty) corresponds with _officium_, unless
you have any other suggestion to make. But the fuller title is _De
Officiis_. I am dedicating it to my son. It seems to me not
inappropriate.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 410

De Myrtilo dilucide. O quales tu semper istos! Itane? in D. Brutum? Di
istis! Ego me, ut scripseram, in Pompeianum non abdidi, primo
tempestatibus, quibus nil taetrius; deinde ab Octaviano cotidie
litterae, ut negotium susciperem, Capuam venirem, iterum rem publicam
servarem, Romam utique statim.

[Sidenote: _Iliad_, vii. 93]

             "Αἴδεσθεν μὲν ἀνήνασθαι, δεῖσαν δ' ὑποδέχθαι."

Is tamen egit sane strenue et agit. Romam veniet cum manu magna, sed est
plane puer. Putat senatum statim. Quis veniet? Si venerit, quis incertis
rebus offendet Antonium? Kal. Ianuar. erit fortasse praesidio, aut
quidem ante depugnabitur. Puero municipia mire favent. Iter enim faciens
in Samnium venit Cales, mansit Teani. Mirifica ἀπάντησις et cohortatio.
Hoc tu putares? Ob hoc ego citius Romam, quam constitueram. Simul et
constituero, scribam.

Etsi nondum stipulationes legeram (nec enim Eros venerat), tamen rem
pridie Idus velim conficias. Epistulas Catinam, Tauromenium, Syracusas
commodius mittere potero, si Valerius interpres ad me nomina gratiosorum
scripserit. Alii enim sunt alias, nostrique familiares fere demortui.
Publice tamen scripsi, si uti vellet eis Valerius; aut mihi nomina
mitteret.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 411

You make it as plain as daylight about Myrtilus. How well you can always
take that lot off! Is it so? Do they accuse D. Brutus?[328] A malison on
them! I have not hidden myself in Pompeii, as I said I should; first
because of the weather, which has been abominable, and secondly because
I get a letter from Octavian every day, asking me to take a hand in
affairs, to come to Capua, to save the Republic again, and anyhow to go
to Rome at once. It is a case of "ashamed to shirk, but yet afraid to
take." He, however, has been acting, and still is acting, with great
vigour. He will come to Rome with a big army; but he is such a boy. He
thinks he can call a Senate at once. Who will come? If anyone comes, who
will offend Antony in this uncertainty? Perhaps he may act as a
safeguard on the 1st of January, or the battle may be over before then.
The country towns are wonderfully enthusiastic for the boy. For, as he
was making his way to Samnium, he came to Cales and stopped at Teanum.
There was a marvellous crowd to meet him and cheers for him. Should you
have thought it? That will make me come to Rome sooner than I had
intended. As soon as I have arranged, I will write.

Footnote 328:

  Of attempting Antony's life.

Though I have not yet read the agreements—for Eros has not come
yet—still I wish you would get the business settled on the 12th. It will
make it easier for me to send letters to Catina, Tauromenium, and
Syracuse, if Valerius the interpreter will let me know the names of the
influential people. For such people vary with the times, and most of my
particular friends are dead. However, I have written general letters, if
Valerius will content himself with them; otherwise he must send me
names.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 412

De Lepidianis feriis Balbus ad me usque ad III Kal. Exspectabo tuas
litteras meque de Torquati negotiolo sciturum puto. Quinti litteras ad
te misi, ut scires, quam valde eum amaret, quem dolet a te minus amari.
Atticae, quoniam, quod optimum in pueris est, hilarula est, meis verbis
suavium des volo.


                                  XII

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Puteolano VIII Id. Nov. a. 710_]

Oppi epistulae, quia perhumana erat, tibi misi exemplum. De Ocella, dum
tu muginaris nec mihi quicquam rescribis, cepi consilium domesticum
itaque me pr. Idus arbitror Romae futurum. Commodius est visum frustra
me istic esse, cum id non necesse esset, quam, si opus esset, non
adesse, et simul, ne intercluderer, metuebam. Ille enim iam adventare
potest. Etsi varii rumores multique, quos cuperem veros; nihil tamen
certi. Ego vero, quicquid est, tecum potius, quam animi pendeam, cum a
te absim, et de te et de me. Sed quid tibi dicam? Bonum animum. De
Ἡρακλειδείῳ Varronis negotia salsa. Me quidem nihil umquam sic
delectavit. Sed haec et alia maiora coram.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 413

About the holidays for Lepidus' inauguration,[329] Balbus tells me they
will last till the 29th. I am looking for a letter from you, and hope I
shall hear about that little affair of Torquatus. I am sending Quintus'
letter to show you how strong his affection is for the youth for whom he
regrets you have so little. Please give Attica a kiss in my name for
being such a merry little thing. It is the best sign in children.

Footnote 329:

  As _Pontifex Maximus_.


                                  XII

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Puteoli, Nov. 6_, B.C. _44_]

I am sending you a copy of Oppius' letter, because it is so very
courteous. About Ocella, while you are messing about and not writing me
a line, I have consulted my own wits, and so I think I shall be in Rome
on the 12th. I think it better for me to come there to no purpose, even
if it is not necessary, than not to be there if it is, and at the same
time I am afraid of being shut in there. For Antony may always be
getting near. However, there are plenty of different rumours, which I
hope may be true; there is no definite news. For my part, whatever it
may be, I would rather be with you, than be in suspense both about you
and about myself, when I am away from you. But what am I to say to you?
Keep up your heart. About Varro's work in Heracleides' vein, that's an
amusing business. I was never so pleased with anything. But of this and
more important things when we meet.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 414


                                 XIIIa

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. Aquini IV Id. Nov. a. 710_]

O casum mirificum! V Idus cum ante lucem de Sinuessano surrexissem
venissemque diluculo ad pontem Tirenum, qui est Menturnis, in quo flexus
est ad iter Arpinas, obviam mihi fit tabellarius; qui me offendit
"δολιχὸν πλόον ὁρμαίνοντα." At ego statim "Cedo," inquam, "si quid ab
Attico." Nondum legere poteramus; nam et lumina dimiseramus, nec satis
lucebat. Cum autem luceret, ante scripta epistula ex duabus tuis prior
mihi legi coepta est. Illa omnium quidem elegantissima. Ne sim salvus,
si aliter scribo ac sentio. Nihil legi humanius. Itaque veniam, quo
vocas, modo adiutore te. Sed nihil tam ἀπροσδιόνυσον mihi primo
videbatur quam ad eas litteras, quibus ego a te consilium petieram, te
mihi ista rescribere. Ecce tibi altera, qua hortaris [Sidenote:
_Odyssey_, iii. 171] "παρ' ἠνεμόεντα Μίμαντα, νήσου ἐπὶ Ψυρίης," Appiam
scilicet "ἐπ' ἀριστέρ' ἔχοντα." Itaque eo die mansi Aquini. Longulum
sane iter et via mala. Inde postridie mane proficiscens has litteras
dedi.


                                 XIIIb

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati III Id. Nov. a. 710_]

... et quidem, ut a me dimitterem invitissimus, fecerunt Erotis
litterae. Rem tibi Tiro narrabit. Tu, quid faciendum sit, videbis.
Praeterea, possimne

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 415


                                 XIIIa

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Aquinum, Nov. 10_, B.C. _44_]

What a strange coincidence! On the 9th I got up before daybreak to go on
from Sinuessa, and before dawn I had reached the Tirenian bridge at
Menturnae, where the road for Arpinum branches off, when I met a
messenger, who found me "on a far journey bent." I at once enquired:
"Pray, is there anything from Atticus?" I could not read as yet, for I
had dismissed the link-bearers and it was not yet light enough. But,
when it got light, I began to read the first of your two letters, having
already written one to you. Your note was a model of elegance. Upon my
life I am not saying more than I mean. I never read a kinder. So I will
come, when you call me, provided you will assist me. But at first sight
I thought nothing could be more _mal à propos_ than such an answer to a
letter in which I had asked for your advice. Then there is your other
letter, in which you advise me to go "by windy Mimas towards the Psyrian
isle,"[330] that is keeping the Appian way on the left side. So I have
stayed the day at Aquinum. It was rather a wearisome journey and the
road was bad. This letter I am sending the next morning as I am leaving.

Footnote 330:

  By Mimas Cicero means the Apennines, and by νῆσος Ψυρίης the _insula
  Arpinas_.


                                 XIIIb

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, Nov. 11_, B.C. _44_]

... and indeed Eros' letter made me dismiss him most unwillingly. Tiro
will explain it to you. Pray see what can be done. Besides let me know
whether

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 416

propius accedere (malo enim esse in Tusculano aut uspiam in suburbano),
an etiam longius discedendum putes, crebro ad me velim scribas. Erit
autem cotidie, cui des. Quod praeterea consulis, quid tibi censeam
faciundum, difficile est, cum absim. Verum tamen, si pares aeque inter
se, quiescendum, sin, latius manabit et quidem ad nos, deinde
communiter.


                                 XIIIc

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati III Id. Nov. a. 710_]

Avide tuum consilium exspecto. Timeo, ne absim, cum adesse me sit
honestius; temere venire non audeo. De Antoni itineribus nescio quid
aliter audio, atque ut ad te scribebam. Omnia igitur velim explices et
ad me certa mittas.

De reliquo quid tibi ego dicam? Ardeo studio historiae (incredibiliter
enim me commovet tua cohortatio); quae quidem nec institui nec effici
potest sine tua ope. Coram igitur hoc quidem conferemus. In praesentia
mihi velim scribas, quibus consulibus C. Fannius M. f. tribunus pl.
fuerit. Videor mihi audisse P. Africano, L. Mummio censoribus. Id igitur
quaero. Tu mihi de iis rebus, quae novantur, omnia certa, clara. III
Idus ex Arpinati.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 417

you think I can come nearer Rome—for I should prefer to be at Tusculum
or somewhere in the neighbourhood of Rome—or whether I ought to go
further off. Write frequently about it. There will be someone to give a
letter to every day. You ask my advice too as to what I think you ought
to do. It is difficult to say, when I am not at Rome. However, if the
two[331] seem equal, keep quiet; if not, the news will spread even here;
then we will take common counsel.

Footnote 331:

  Antony and Octavian.


                                 XIIIc

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, Nov. 11_, B.C. _44_]

I am expecting your advice eagerly. I fear I may be absent, when honour
demands my presence; yet I dare not come rashly. About Antony's march I
hear now rather a different tale from what I wrote. So I wish you would
unravel the whole mystery and send me certain news.

For the rest what can I say? I have a burning passion for history—for
your suggestion has had a wonderful effect upon me—but it is not easy to
begin or to carry it out without your assistance. So we will discuss it
when we meet. At the present moment I wish you would tell me in what
year C. Fannius, son of Marcus, was tribune. I think I have been told it
was in the censorship of Africanus and Mummius. So that is what I want
to know. Please send me clear and certain details of all the changes in
the constitution. Arpinum, Nov. 11.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 418


                                  XIV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati medio mense Novembri a. 710_]

Nihil erat plane, quod scriberem. Nam, cum Puteolis essem, cotidie
aliquid novi de Octaviano, multa etiam falsa de Antonio. Ad ea autem,
quae scripsisti (tres enim acceperam III Idus a te epistulas), valde
tibi adsentior, si multum possit Octavianus, multo firmius acta tyranni
comprobatum iri quam in Telluris, atque id contra Brutum fore. Sin autem
vincitur, vides intolerabilem Antonium, ut, quem velis, nescias. O Sesti
tabellarium hominem nequam! Postridie Puteolis Romae se dixit fore. Quod
me mones, ut pedetemptim, adsentior; etsi aliter cogitabam. Nec me
Philippus aut Marcellus movet. Alia enim eorum ratio est et, si non est,
tamen videtur. Sed in isto iuvene, quamquam animi satis, auctoritatis
parum est. Tamen vide, si forte in Tusculano recte esse possum, ne id
melius sit. Ero libentius; nihil enim ignorabo. An hic, cum Antonius
venerit?

Sed, ut aliud ex alio, mihi non est dubium, quin, quod Graeci καθῆκον,
nos "officium." Id autem quid dubitas quin etiam in rem publicam
praeclare quadret? Nonne dicimus "consulum officium, senatus

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 419


                                  XIV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, middle of Nov._, B.C. _44_]

I have nothing whatever to write about. For, when I was at Puteoli,
there was something fresh about Octavian every day, and plenty of false
reports about Antony. However, I had three letters from you on the
fifth, and I strongly agree with what you said, that if Octavian has
much success, the tyrant's proposals will receive stronger confirmation
than they did in the temple of Tellus,[332] and that will be against the
interests of Brutus. But if, on the other hand, he is conquered, you see
Antony will be intolerable; so you don't know which you want. What a
rascal Sestius' messenger is! He said he would be in Rome the day after
he left Puteoli! You advise me to move slowly, and I agree, though once
I thought differently. I am not influenced by Philippus or Marcellus;
for their position is different, or, if it is not, it looks as though it
were.[333] But that youth, though he has plenty of spirit, has little
influence. However, see whether it would not be better for me to be at
Tusculum, if I should do right in being there. I would rather be there;
for I should get all the news. Or had I better be here when Antony
comes?

Footnote 332:

  Where the Senate met on March 17, two days after the murder of Caesar.
  Cf. _Att._ XIV. 10.

Footnote 333:

  Marcellus was Octavian's brother-in-law; Philippus his stepfather.

But, as one thing suggests another,[334] I know that what the Greeks
call καθῆκον (duty), we call _officium_. But why should you doubt
whether the word fits appropriately in political affairs? Don't we say
the

Footnote 334:

  Apparently the idea of "duty" was suggested by _recte_ just above,
  though it hardly bears that meaning in this case.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 420

officium, imperatoris officium"? Praeclare convenit; aut da melius. Male
narras de Nepotis filio. Valde mehercule moveor et moleste fero.
Nescieram omnino esse istum puerum. Caninium perdidi, hominem, quod ad
me attinet, non ingratum. Athenodorum nihil est quod hortere. Misit enim
satis bellum ὑπόμνημα. Gravedini, quaeso, omni ratione subveni. Avi tui
pronepos scribit ad patris mei nepotem se ex Nonis iis, quibus nos magna
gessimus; aedem Opis explicaturum idque ad populum. Videbis igitur et
scribes. Sexti iudicium exspecto.


                                   XV

                           CICERO ATTICO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Arpinati ante V. Id. Dec. a. 710_]

Noli putare pigritia me facere, quod non mea manu scribam, sed mehercule
pigritia. Nihil enim habeo aliud, quod dicam. Et tamen in tuis quoque
epistulis Alexim videor adgnoscere. Sed ad rem venio.

Ego, si me non improbissime Dolabella tractasset, dubitassem fortasse,
utrum remissior essem an summo iure contenderem. Nunc vero etiam gaudeo
mihi causam oblatam, in qua et ipse sentiat et reliqui omnes me ab illo
abalienatum, idque prae me feram, et quidem me mea causa facere et rei
publicae, ut

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 421

_officium_ of consuls, of the Senate, of generals? It is quite
appropriate; if not, suggest a better word. That is bad news about
Nepos' son. I am much disturbed and distressed. I had no idea he had
such a son. I have lost Canidius, a man who, so far as I was concerned,
has not been ungrateful.[335] There is no necessity for you to stir up
Athenodorus. He has sent me quite a good memorandum. Pray do all you can
for your cold. Your grandfather's greatgrandson writes to my father's
grandson[336] that after the 5th of December, the day of my great
achievement,[337] he means to explain about the temple of Ops,[338] and
that in public. Keep your eyes open then and let me know. I am anxious
to hear what Sextus has to say.

Footnote 335:

  For Cicero's defence of him in 55 B.C.

Footnote 336:

  Young Quintus Cicero to Cicero's son.

Footnote 337:

  The arrest of the Catilinarian conspirators in 63 B.C.

Footnote 338:

  Antony's seizure of the public funds deposited in that temple. Cf.
  XIV. 14.


                                   XV

                      CICERO TO ATTICUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Arpinum, before Dec. 9_, B.C. _44_]

Don't think it is laziness that prevents my writing myself; and yet, to
be sure, it is nothing but laziness, for I have no other excuse to make.
However, I seem to recognize Alexis' hand in your letters too. But to
come to the point.

If Dolabella had not treated me most disgracefully, I should perhaps
have had some doubt whether to let him down lightly or to claim my full
rights. But, as it is, I am glad to have some reason for showing him and
other people that I have quarrelled with him; and I will make it clear
that I detest him both on my own account and on that of the Republic,
because, when at my instigation

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 422

illum oderim, quod, cum eam me auctore defendere coepisset, non modo
deseruerit emptus pecunia, sed etiam, quantum in ipso fuerit, everterit.
Quod autem quaeris, quo modo agi placeat, cum dies venerit, primum velim
eius modi sit, ut non alienum sit me Romae esse; de quo ut de ceteris
faciam, ut tu censueris. De summa autem agi prorsus vehementer et severe
volo. Etsi sponsores appellare videtur habere quandam δυσωπίαν, tamen,
hoc quale sit, consideres velim. Possumus enim, ut sponsores appellemus,
procuratorem introducere; neque enim illi litem contestabuntur. Quo
facto non sum nescius sponsores liberari. Sed et illi turpe arbitror eo
nomine, quod satisdato debeat, procuratores eius non dissolvere et
nostrae gravitatis ius nostrum sine summa illius ignominia persequi. De
hoc quid placeat, rescribas velim; nec dubito, quin hoc totum lenius
administraturus sis.

Redeo ad rem publicam. Multa mehercule a te saepe in πολιτικῷ genere
prudenter, sed his litteris nihil prudentius: "Quamquam enim potest
et[339] in praesentia belle iste puer retundit Antonium, tamen exitum
exspectare debemus." At quae contio! nam est missa mihi. Iurat, ita sibi
parentis honores consequi liceat, et simul dextram intendit ad statuam.
Μηδὲ σωθείην ὑπό γε τοιούτου! Sed, ut scribis, certissimum esse video
discrimen Cascae nostri tribunatum, de quo quidem ipso dixi Oppio, cum
me hortaretur,

Footnote 339:

  potest et _Gronovius_: postea _MSS._

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 423

he had begun to defend it, he not only accepted a bribe to desert it,
but did his best to overthrow it. You ask how I want things to be
managed when the day comes. First, I should like them to be so arranged
that it may appear natural for me to come to Rome. But about that, and
indeed about the rest, I will do as you advise. On the main point,
however, I want really active and serious steps to be taken. Though it
is counted bad form to call upon the sureties for payment, still
consider how that method would do. We can bring his agents into the case
in order to call upon the sureties, for the agents will not dispute the
suit, though, if they do, I know of course the sureties will escape. But
I think it will be a disgrace for him, if his agents do not pay up a
debt for which he gave security, and my position demands that I should
prosecute my case without extreme humiliation to him. Please write and
tell me what you think best; I have no doubt you will carry it through
with reasonable moderation.

I return to public affairs. You have often said many a wise thing about
politics, but never anything wiser than this letter: "For though the
youth is strong and at present holds[340] Antony well in check, still we
must wait and see." But what a speech![341] For it has been sent to me.
He swears by his hopes of attaining to the honours of his father, and at
the same time stretches out his hand towards the statue. Be hanged to
salvation with a saviour like that! But, as you say, I see Casca's
tribuneship will afford the best criterion of his policy.[342] It was
_apropos_ of that that I said to Oppius, when he wanted me to

Footnote 340:

  Or "is capable of holding and at present does hold."

Footnote 341:

  A _contio_ delivered by Octavian.

Footnote 342:

  Casca was one of the murderers of Caesar, and tribune elect.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 424

ut adulescentem totamque causam manumque veteranorum complecterer, me
nullo modo facere posse, ni mihi exploratum esset eum non modo non
inimicum tyrannoctonis, verum etiam amicum fore. Cum ille diceret ita
futurum, "Quid igitur festinamus?" inquam. "Illi enim mea opera ante
Kal. Ian. nihil opus est, nos autem eius voluntatem ante Idus Decembr.
perspiciemus in Casca." Valde mihi adsensus est. Quam ob rem haec quidem
hactenus. Quod reliquum est, cotidie tabellarios habebis, et, ut ego
arbitror, etiam quod scribas, habebis cotidie. Leptae litterarum
exemplum tibi misi, ex quo mihi videtur Στρατύλαξ ille deiectus de
gradu. Sed tu, cum legeris, existumabis.

Obsignata iam epistula litteras a te et a Sexto accepi. Nihil iucundius
litteris Sexti, nihil amabilius. Nam tuae breves, priores erant
uberrimae. Tu quidem et prudenter et amice suades, ut in his locis
potissimum sim, quoad audiamus, haec, quae commota sunt, quorsus
evadant. Sed me, mi Attice, non sane hoc quidem tempore movet res
publica, non quo aut sit mihi quicquam carius aut esse debeat, sed
desperatis etiam Hippocrates vetat adhibere medicinam. Quare ista
valeant; me res familiaris movet. Rem dico; immo vero existimatio. Cum
enim tanta reliqua sint, ne Terentiae quidem adhuc quod solvam expeditum
est. Terentiam dico; scis nos pridem iam constituisse Montani nomine HS
¯XXV¯ dissolvere. Pudentissime hoc Cicero petierat ut fide sua.
Liberalissime, ut tibi quoque placuerat, promiseram,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 425

open my arms to the youth, the whole cause, and the troop of veterans,
that I could not do anything of the kind, until I had made sure that he
would not only not be an enemy, but would be a friend to the
tyrannicides. He said that would be so, and I replied: "Then, what is
the hurry? He does not want my assistance before the 1st of January, and
we shall see what he intends before the middle of December in Casca's
case." He quite agreed with me. So that's enough of that. For the rest
you will have messengers every day, and I think you will have something
to write every day too. I am sending a copy of Lepta's letter, and from
it you will see that that toy captain[343] has had a fall. But you will
judge for yourself when you have read it.

Footnote 343:

  Antony.

When I had already sealed this letter, I got one from you and one from
Sextus. Nothing could have been pleasanter or more amiable than Sextus'
letter. For yours was a short note, the earlier one having been very
full. It is wise and friendly advice you give me to stay here by
preference, till we hear how this disturbance is going to end. But just
at this minute, my dear Atticus, it is not the Republic that I am
bothered about—not that any thing is or ought to be dearer to me, but
even Hippocrates admits it is useless to apply medicine in desperate
cases. So let that go hang—it is my private concerns that bother me.
Concerns, do I say? Nay, rather my credit; for, though I have such big
balances, I have not even enough money on hand yet to pay Terentia. Do I
speak of Terentia? You know we arranged long ago to pay Montanus' debt
of £250.[344] My son very considerately begged me to do it out of his
credit. As you also agreed, I promised quite freely,

Footnote 344:

  25 sestertia.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 426

Erotique dixeram, ut sepositum haberet. Non modo non fecit sed
iniquissimo faenore versuram facere Aurelius coactus est. Nam de
Terentiae nomine Tiro ad me scripsit te dicere nummos a Dolabella fore.
Male eum credo intellexisse, si quisquam male intellegit, potius nihil
intellexisse. Tu enim ad me scripsisti Coccei responsum et isdem paene
verbis Eros. Veniendum est igitur vel in ipsam flammam. Turpius est enim
privatim cadere quam publice. Itaque ceteris de rebus, quas ad me
suavissume scripsisti, perturbato animo non potui, ut consueram,
rescribere. Consenti hac cura,[345] ubi sum, ut me expediam; quibus
autem rebus, venit quidem mihi in mentem, sed certi constituere nihil
possum, prius quam te videro. Qui minus autem ego istic recte esse
possim, quam est Marcellus? Sed non id agitur, neque id maxime curo;
quid curem, vides. Adsum igitur.

Footnote 345:

  consenti hac cura _Tyrrell_: consenti in hac cura _MSS._: contendo
  Astura _Gurlitt_.


                                  XVI

                      CICERO SUO SAL. DIC. ATTICO.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano inter a. d. V et prid. Non. Quint. a.
           710_]

Iucundissimas tuas legi litteras. Ad Plancum scripsi, misi. Habes
exemplum. Cum Tirone quid sit locutus, cognoscam ex ipso. Cum sorore
ages attentius, si te occupatione ista relaxaris.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 427

and told Eros to set a sum apart for it. Not only did he fail to do so,
but Aurelius[346] had to raise another loan at extortionate interest.
For Terentia's debt Tiro tells me you said there would be money from
Dolabella. I think he misunderstood you, if anyone can misunderstand
anybody, or rather he did not understand at all. For you sent me
Cocceius' answer, and so did Eros in nearly the same words. So I must
come even into the heart of the conflagration, for private failure is
even more disgraceful than public failure. So for the other matters
contained in your pleasant letter, I was too perturbed in mind to answer
them as usual. Combine with me in extricating me from the tiresome
position I am in; how it is to be done I have some idea, but I cannot
arrange things with certainty till I see you. However, how can I be less
safe in Rome than Marcellus? But that is not the point, nor is it my
chief anxiety; what I am anxious about you see. So I am coming.

Footnote 346:

  Agent of Montanus.


                                  XVI

              CICERO SENDS GREETING TO HIS FRIEND ATTICUS.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, between July 3 and 6_, B.C. _44_]

I have read your delightful letter. To Plancus I have written and sent
the letter. Here is a copy. What he said to Tiro I shall learn from Tiro
himself. You will attend more carefully to your sister's affairs, if you
have a rest from that other business of yours.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 428


                                  XVIa

                 M. CICERO L. PLANCO PRAET. DESIG. SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. in Tusculano eodem tempore_]

Attici nostri te valde studiosum esse cognovi, mei vero ita cupidum, ut
mehercule paucos aeque observantes atque amantes me habere existimem. Ad
paternas enim magnas et veteres et iustas necessitudines magnam attulit
accessionem tua voluntas erga me meaque erga te par atque mutua.

Buthrotia tibi causa ignota non est. Egi enim saepe de ea re tecum
tibique totam rem demonstravi; quae est acta hoc modo. Ut primum
Buthrotium agrum proscriptum vidimus, commotus Atticus libellum
composuit. Eum mihi dedit, ut darem Caesari; eram enim cenaturus apud
eum illo die. Eum libellum Caesari dedi. Probavit causam, rescripsit
Attico aequa eum postulare, admonuit tamen, ut pecuniam reliquam
Buthrotii ad diem solverent. Atticus, qui civitatem conservatam cuperet,
pecuniam numeravit de suo. Quod cum esset factum, adiimus ad Caesarem,
verba fecimus pro Buthrotiis, liberalissimum decretum abstulimus; quod
est obsignatum ab amplissimis viris. Quae cum essent acta, mirari
equidem solebam pati Caesarem convenire eos, qui agrum Buthrotium
concupissent, neque solum pati, sed etiam ei negotio te praeficere.
Itaque et ego cum illo locutus sum et saepius quidem, ut etiam accusarer
ab eo, quod parum constantiae suae confiderem, et M. Messallae et ipsi
Attico dixit, ut sine cura essent,

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 429


                                  XVIa

           M. CICERO TO L. PLANCUS, PRAETOR ELECT, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Tusculum, at the same time_]

I know you are much attached to our friend Atticus, and to my society
you are so partial that I am sure I count myself to have few friends so
attentive and affectionate. For our ancestral ties, so strong and old
and natural, have been strengthened by the equal and reciprocal liking
we have, you for me and I for you.

The case of the Buthrotians is not unknown to you. For I have often
spoken to you about it and explained the whole affair to you. This is
what has happened. When first we saw that the lands of Buthrotum had
been confiscated, Atticus was troubled and composed a petition. That he
gave to me to hand to Caesar, for I was going to dine with him that day.
That petition I handed to Caesar. He approved of the case and wrote back
to Atticus that his request was reasonable, but he warned him that the
Buthrotians must pay the rest of the money at the proper time. Atticus,
who wanted to save the city, paid the money on his own account. When
that was done we approached Caesar, said a word for the Buthrotians, and
obtained a most generous decree, which was signed by persons of
importance. After that I was much astonished that Caesar used to let
those who had coveted the land of the Buthrotians hold meetings, and not
only allowed them to do so, but even put you at the head of the
commission. So I spoke to him about it, and that indeed so often that he
even reproached me for having so little faith in his consistency; and he
told Messalla and Atticus himself not to worry about it, and admitted
candidly

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 430

aperteque ostendebat se praesentium animos (erat enim popularis, ut
noras) offendere nolle; cum autem mare transissent, curaturum se, ut in
alium agrum deducerentur. Haec illo vivo. Post interitum autem Caesaris,
ut primum ex senatus consulto causas consules cognoscere instituerunt,
haec, quae supra scripsi, ad eos delata sunt. Probaverunt causam sine
ulla dubitatione seque ad te litteras daturos esse dixerunt. Ego autem,
mi Plance, etsi non dubitabam, quin et senatus consultum et lex et
consulum decretum ac litterae apud te plurimum auctoritatis haberent,
teque ipsius Attici causa velle intellexeram, tamen hoc pro coniunctione
et benevolentia nostra mihi sumpsi, ut id a te peterem, quod tua
singularis humanitas suavissimique mores a te essent impetraturi. Id
autem est, ut hoc, quod te tua sponte facturum esse certo scio, honoris
nostri causa libenter, prolixe, celeriter facias. Mihi nemo est amicior
nec iucundior nec carior Attico. Cuius antea res solum familiaris
agebatur eaque magna, nunc accessit etiam existimatio, ut, quod
consecutus est magna et industria et gratia et vivo Caesare et mortuo,
id te adiuvante obtineat. Quod si a te erit impetratum, sic velim
existimes, me de tua liberalitate ita interpretaturum, ut tuo summo
beneficio me adfectum iudicem. Ego, quae te velle quaeque ad te
pertinere arbitrabor, studiose diligenterque curabo. Da operam, ut
valeas.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 431

that he did not want to offend the people, while they were in Rome—for,
as you know, he aimed at popularity—but when they were across the sea,
he would see to it that they were transferred to some other land. That
was what happened in Caesar's lifetime. But, after Caesar's death, as
soon as the consuls in accordance with a decree of the Senate began to
investigate cases, the facts as I have stated them were put before them.
They approved of the case without any hesitation, and said they would
send you letters. Now, my dear Plancus, though I have no doubt that a
decree of the Senate, a statute, a decree of the consuls, and their
despatch, will have the greatest weight with you, and I understand that
you will wish to please Atticus himself, yet I have taken it upon myself
in view of our connection and affection, to ask you for what your own
exceptional amiability and your goodness of heart would win from you
themselves. That is, that you should for my sake do this thing, which I
am sure you will do of your own accord, freely, fully, and quickly. I
have no greater and no dearer friend than Atticus. At first it was only
a question of his money, and a good sum of it too; but now it concerns
his credit too, that he should obtain with your assistance what he won
by his great persistency and his popularity both in Caesar's lifetime
and after his death. If he obtains it from you, I hope you will consider
that I shall interpret your liberality as a great favour bestowed upon
myself. For my part, I will show care and diligence in anything that I
think you desire or that concerns you. Take care of your health.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 432


                                  XVIb

                    CICERO PLANCO PRAET. DESIG. SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. paulo post ep. 16a_]

Iam antea petivi abs te per litteras, ut, cum causa Buthrotiorum probata
a consulibus esset, quibus et lege et senatus consulto permissum erat,
ut de Caesaris actis cognoscerent, statuerent, iudicarent, eam rem tu
adiuvares, Atticumque nostrum, cuius te studiosum cognovi, et me, qui
non minus laboro, molestia liberares. Omnibus enim rebus magna cura,
multa opera et labore confectis in te positum est, ut nostrae
sollicitudinis finem quam primum facere possimus. Quamquam intellegimus
ea te esse prudentia, ut videas, si ea decreta consulum, quae de
Caesaris actis interposita sunt, non serventur, magnam perturbationem
rerum fore. Equidem, cum multa, quod necesse erat in tanta occupatione,
non probentur, quae Caesar statuerit, tamen otii pacisque causa acerrime
illa soleo defendere. Quod tibi idem magno opere faciendum censeo;
quamquam haec epistula non suasoris est, sed rogatoris. Igitur, mi
Plance, rogo te et etiam atque etiam oro sic medius fidius, ut maiore
studio magisque ex animo agere non possim, ut totum hoc negotium ita
agas, ita tractes, ita conficias, ut, quod sine ulla dubitatione apud
consules obtinuimus propter summam bonitatem et aequitatem causae, id tu
nos obtinuisse non modo facile patiare, sed etiam gaudeas. Qua quidem
voluntate te esse erga Atticum saepe praesens et illi ostendisti et vero

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 433


                                  XVIb

              CICERO TO PLANCUS, PRAETOR ELECT, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Written shortly after 16a_]

I have already written to ask you to render assistance in the matter of
the Buthrotians, since the consuls, who had the authority of a statute
and a senatorial decree to investigate, determine, and decide on
Caesar's proceedings, have approved of their case; and to relieve
Atticus, whom I know you admire, and myself, who am as much concerned as
he is, from trouble. For now that we have brought the whole business to
an end with the expenditure of much care, much labour, and pains, it
rests with you to allow us to make an end to our anxiety as early as
possible. However, I am sure that you have wisdom enough to see, that,
if the decisions delivered by the consuls about Caesar's proceedings are
not observed, things will be thrown into great confusion. For my part,
though one cannot approve of many of Caesar's arrangements—as was
natural in the case of a person so busy—still I am wont to uphold them
staunchly for the sake of peace and quietness: and I am strongly of the
opinion that you should do the same, though I am not writing as an
adviser but as a suppliant. So, my dear Plancus, I beg and beseech
you—and I do assure you I could not be more anxious or more in earnest
about anything—to take in hand, to conduct, and to carry through all
this business in such a way, that, what we have obtained from the
consuls without any hesitation solely on the justice and equity of our
case, we may obtain from you not only with your kind indulgence but with
alacrity on your part. How kindly disposed you are to Atticus you have
often shown him and me, too, when we

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 434

etiam mihi. Quod si feceris, me, quem voluntate et paterna necessitudine
coniunctum semper habuisti, maximo beneficio devinctum habebis, idque ut
facias, te vehementer etiam atque etiam rogo.


                                  XVIc

                        CICERO CAPITONI SUO SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. eodem tempore quo ep. 16b_]

Numquam putavi fore ut supplex ad te venirem; sed hercule facile patior
datum tempus, in quo amorem experirer tuum. Atticum quanti faciam, scis.
Amabo te, da mihi et hoc, obliviscere mea causa illum aliquando suo
familiari, adversario tuo voluisse consultum, cum illius existimatio
ageretur. Hoc primum ignoscere est humanitatis tuae; suos enim quisque
debet tueri; deinde, si me amas (omitte Atticum), Ciceroni tuo, quem
quanti facias, prae te soles ferre, totum hoc da, ut, quod semper
existimavi, nunc plane intellegam, me a te multum amari. Buthrotios cum
Caesar decreto suo, quod ego obsignavi cum multis amplissimis viris,
liberavisset ostendissetque nobis se, cum agrarii mare transissent,
litteras missurum, quem in agrum deducerentur, accidit, ut subito ille
interiret. Deinde, quem ad modum tu scis (interfuisti enim), cum
consules oporteret ex senatus consulto de actis Caesaris cognoscere, res
ab iis in Kal. Iun. dilata est. Accessit ad senatus consultum lex, quae
lata est a. d. IIII Non.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 435

have been together. If you will do this, you will have bound me—who have
always been attached to you by my own inclination and by our family
friendship—to you under a heavy obligation, and I beg you earnestly and
repeatedly to do so.


                                  XVIc

                       CICERO TO CAPITO, GREETING

[Sidenote: _Written at the same time as 16b_]

I never thought I should have to come before you as a suppliant, but
upon my soul I am not sorry that I should have an occasion for testing
your affection. You know how fond I am of Atticus. Pray grant me one
other favour and forget for my sake that once he wished to support a
friend of his, who was an enemy of yours, when his reputation was at
stake. In the first place your kindly disposition should bid you forgive
that, for everyone ought to look after his own friends; in the next
place, leaving Atticus out of the question, if you love me—and you are
always declaring how great is the respect you have for your friend
Cicero—grant me that now I may know for a certainty what I have always
believed, that you have a great affection for me. By a decree, which I
and many important persons signed, Caesar set free the Buthrotians, and
assured us that, when the land-commissioners had crossed the sea, he
would send a despatch about the territory to which they should be
transferred; and then it happened that he died suddenly. Then, as you
know (for you were present), when the consuls ought to have decided on
Caesar's proceedings in accordance with a senatorial decree, they
postponed the matter till the 1st of June. On the 2nd of June a law was
passed in

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 436

Iun., quae lex earum rerum, quas Caesar statuisset, decrevisset,
egisset, consulibus cognitionem dedit. Causa Buthrotiorum delata est ad
consules. Decretum Caesaris recitatum est et multi praeterea libelli
Caesaris prolati. Consules de consilii sententia decreverunt secundum
Buthrotios: litteras ad[347] Plancum dederunt. Nunc, mi Capito (scio
enim, quantum semper apud eos, quibuscum sis, posse soleas, eo plus apud
hominem facillimum atque humanissimum, Plancum), enitere, elabora vel
potius eblandire, effice, ut Plancus, quem spero optimum esse, sit etiam
melior opera tua. Omnino res huius modi mihi videtur esse, ut sine
cuiusquam gratia Plancus ipse pro ingenio et prudentia sua non sit
dubitaturus, quin decretum consulum, quorum et lege et senatus consulto
cognitio et iudicium fuit, conservet, praesertim cum hoc genere
cognitionum labefactato acta Caesaris in dubium ventura videantur, quae
non modo ii, quorum interest, sed etiam ii, qui illa non probant, otii
causa confirmari velint. Quod cum ita sit, tamen interest nostra Plancum
hoc animo libenti prolixoque facere; quod certe faciet, si tu nervulos
tuos mihi saepe cognitos suavitatemque, qua nemo tibi par est,
adhibueris. Quod ut facias, te vehementer rogo.

Footnote 347:

  litteras ad _added by Manutius_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 437

addition to the decree of the Senate, granting the consuls the right of
deciding on Caesar's statutes, decrees, and proceedings. The case of the
Buthrotians was put before the consuls. Caesar's decree was read to
them, and many other papers of Caesar's were brought forward too. By the
advice of their council the consuls decided in favour of the
Buthrotians, and sent a despatch to Plancus. Now, Capito, I know the
influence you always have over those with whom you are, especially with
so amiable and good-natured a person as Plancus; please use all your
energy, or rather all your powers of persuasion, and make Plancus, who I
hope will be sufficiently kindly himself, still more kindly. In any case
I think this is the state of affairs: that without favouring anybody,
Plancus will have sense and wisdom enough to have no hesitation in
obeying the decree of the consuls, who had the right of enquiry and
decision conferred upon them by law and by a senatorial decree,
especially as, if this kind of decision is rendered null, Caesar's
proceedings may well be called in question; and not only those who
benefit by them, but even those who disapprove of them, have to give
them their support for the sake of peace. Though that is the case, still
it is to our interest that Plancus should do this willingly and freely;
and no doubt he will if you exert your influence, which I know so well,
and your persuasive power, which is unequalled: and that I beg you
earnestly to do.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 438


                                  XVId

                         CICERO C. CUPIENNIO S.

[Sidenote: _Scr. eodem tempore quo ep. 16c_]

Patrem tuum plurimi feci, meque ille mirifice et coluit et amavit; nec
mehercule umquam mihi dubium fuit, quin a te diligerer; ego quidem id
facere non destiti. Quam ob rem peto a te in maiorem modum, ut civitatem
Buthrotiam subleves decretumque consulum, quod ii secundum Buthrotios
fecerunt, cum et lege et senatus consulto statuendi potestatem haberent,
des operam ut Plancus noster quam primum confirmet et comprobet. Hoc te
vehementer, mi Cupienni, etiam atque etiam rogo.


                                  XVIe

                      CICERO PLANCO PRAET. DES. S.

[Sidenote: _Scr. post ep. 16b_]

Ignosce mihi, quod, cum antea accuratissime de Buthrotiis ad te
scripserim, eadem de re saepius scribam. Non mehercule, mi Plance,
facio, quo parum confidam aut liberalitati tuae aut nostrae amicitiae,
sed, cum tanta res agatur Attici nostri, nunc vero etiam existimatio, ut
id, quod probavit Caesar nobis testibus et obsignatoribus, qui et
decretis et responsis Caesaris interfueramus, videatur obtinere
potuisse, praesertim cum tota potestas eius rei tua sit, ut ea, quae
consules decreverunt secundum

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 439


                                  XVId

                   CICERO TO C. CUPIENNIUS, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Written at the same time at 16c_]

I was a great admirer of your father, and he was exceedingly attentive
and affectionate to me; and I am sure I have never had any doubt that
you have a regard for me. Certainly I have never ceased to have one for
you. So I beg you with more than usual earnestness to assist the city of
Buthrotum, and to make it your business that our friend Plancus should
confirm and verify the decree which the consuls made in favour of the
Buthrotians, when they had been granted the power of settling the
question both by a statute and by a senatorial decree. This I do most
earnestly beg and entreat you, my dear Cupiennius.


                                  XVIe

              CICERO TO PLANCUS, PRAETOR ELECT, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Written after 16b_]

Pardon me for writing again on the same subject, when I have already
written very fully to you about the Buthrotians. I do assure you, my
dear Plancus, that I do not do so because I have little faith in your
generosity or your friendship for me. But my friend Atticus has so great
a monetary stake in the matter; and now, what is more, his very
reputation is involved in showing that he can obtain what Caesar
approved of, and we, who were present when Caesar made his decrees and
gave his answer, witnessed and sealed. And I appeal to you especially,
because it is a case where the whole power, I will not say of
confirming, but of confirming freely and willingly

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 440

Caesaris decreta et responsa, non dicam comprobes, sed studiose
libenterque comprobes. Id mihi sic erit gratum, ut nulla res gratior
esse possit. Etsi iam sperabam, cum has litteras accepisses, fore ut ea,
quae superioribus litteris a te petissemus, impetrata essent, tamen non
faciam finem rogandi, quoad nobis nuntiatum erit te id fecisse, quod
magna cum spe exspectamus. Deinde enim confido fore ut alio genere
litterarum utamur tibique pro tuo summo beneficio gratias agamus. Quod
si acciderit, velim sic existimes, non tibi tam Atticum, cuius permagna
res agitur, quam me, qui non minus laboro quam ille, obligatum fore.


                                  XVIf

                          CICERO CAPITONI SAL.

[Sidenote: _Scr. paulo post ep. 16c_]

Non dubito, quin mirere atque etiam stomachere, quod tecum de eadem re
agam saepius. Hominis familiarissimi et mihi omnibus rebus
coniunctissimi permagna res agitur, Attici. Cognovi ego tua studia in
amicos, etiam in te amicorum. Multum potes nos apud Plancum iuvare. Novi
humanitatem tuam; scio, quam sis amicis iucundus. Nemo nos in hac causa
plus iuvare potest quam tu. Et res ita est firma, ut debet esse, quam
consules de consilii sententia decreverunt, cum et lege et senatus
consulto cognoscerent. Tamen omnia posita putamus in Planci

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 441

what the consuls decreed in accordance with Caesar's decrees and
promises, lies in your hands. It will be doing me a favour than which
none could be greater. Although I hope that by the time you receive this
letter you will have granted me the petition I made in my former letter,
still I shall not cease from asking until I have news that you have done
what I am looking forward to with great hope. Then I trust I shall write
a different kind of letter, and pay my thanks for your exceeding
kindness. If that comes to pass I would have you think that you have not
so much put Atticus, in spite of the huge sum of money he has at stake,
under an obligation, as myself, who take an equal interest in the
matter.


                                  XVIf

                      CICERO TO CAPITO, GREETING.

[Sidenote: _Written shortly after 16c_]

I have no doubt you are astonished and even annoyed with me for
approaching you twice on the same subject. Atticus, my greatest friend
and my closest intimate in every way, has grave interests at stake. I
know the willingness with which you help your friends and your friends
help you. You can render us much assistance with Plancus. I know the
kindness of your heart; I know how welcome you are to your friends.
There is no one who can help us more than you in this case. And the case
is as sound as a case ought to be which the consuls have decided on the
advice of their council, when they had the right of decision conferred
on them by statute and by senatorial decree. Still to us the whole case
seems to lie in the generosity of your

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 442

tui liberalitate; quem quidem arbitramur cum officii sui et rei publicae
causa decretum consulum comprobaturum tum libenter nostra causa esse
facturum. Adiuvabis igitur, mi Capito. Quod ut facias, te vehementer
etiam atque etiam rogo.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                Page 443

friend Plancus; and, indeed, we think he will ratify the consuls' decree
both for duty's sake and for the sake of the constitution, and that he
will do so willingly for our sake. So please help us, my dear Capito. I
entreat and beseech you earnestly to do so.




                CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER OF THE LETTERS.[348]

       XII. 2 April, 46

            3 June 11, 46

            5c June 12, 46

            4 June 13, 46

            1 November 23, 46

            6 Intercalary month, 46

            6a Intercalary month, 46

            7 Intercalary month, 46

            8 Intercalary month, 46

            11 Intercalary month, 46

            13 March 7, 45

            14 March 8, 45

            15 March 9, 45

            16 March 10, 45

            18 March 11, 45

            17 March 12, 45

            18a March 13, 45

            19 March 14, 45

            20 March 15, 45

      XIII. 6 Circa March 15, 45

       XII. 12 March 16, 45

            21 March 17, 45

            22 March 18, 45

            23 March 19, 45

            24 March 20, 45

            25 March 21, 45

            26 March 22, 45

            27 March 23, 45

            28 March 24, 45

            29 March 25, 45

            33 March 26, 45

            30 March 27, 45

            32 March 28, 45

            31 March 29, 45

            34 March 30, 45

            35 May 1 or 2, 45

            36 May 3, 45

            37 May 4, 45

            37a May 5, 45

            38 May 6, 45

            38a May 7, 45

            39 May 8, 45

            40 May 9, 45

            42 May 10, 45

            41 May 11, 45

            43 May 12, 45

            44 May 13, 45

      XIII. 26 May 14, 45

       XII. 46 May 15, 45

            47 May 16, 45

            48 May 17, 45

            45 May 17, 45

            50 May 18, 45

            49 May 19, 45

            51 May 20, 45

            52 May 21, 45

            53 May 22, 45

      XIII. 1 May 23, 45

            2 May 24, 45

            27 May 25, 45

            28 May 26, 45

            29 May 27, 45

            2a May 27, 45

            31 May 28, 45

            30 May 28, 45

            2b May 29, 45

            32 May 29, 45

            3 May 30, 45

       XII. 5a May 31, 45

      XIII. 4 June 1, 45

            5 June 2, 45

            33 June 3, 45

            6a June 4, 45

            8 June 8, 45

            7 June 9, 45

            7a June 10, 45

       XII. 5b June 11 or 12, 45

      XIII. 9 June 18, 45

            10 June 19-21, 45

            11 June 23, 45

            12 June 24, 45

            13, 14 June 26, 45

            14, 15 June 27, 45

            16 June 28, 45

            17, 18 June 29, 45

            19 June 30, 45

            21a June 30 or July 1, 45

            20 July 2 or 3, 45

            22 July 4, 45

            33a July 9, 45

            23 July 10, 45

            24 July 11, 45

            25 July 12, 45

            35, 36 July 13, 45

            43 July 14, 45

            44 July 20 or 21, 45

            34 July 27, 45

       XII. 9 July 27, 45

            10 July 28, 45

      XIII. 21 July 29, 45

            47a July 30, 45

            48 August 2, 45

            37 August 2, 45

            38 Circa August 4, 45

            39 August 5, 45

            40 August 7 or 8, 45

            41 August 8 or 9, 45

            45 August 11, 45

            46 August 12, 45

            47 August 13, 45

            49 Circa August 22, 45

            50 Circa August 24, 45

            51 August 26, 45

            52 December 21, 45

            42 December, 45

       XIV. 1 April 7, 44

            2 April 8, 44

            3 April 9, 44

            4 April 10, 44

            5 April 11, 44

            6 April 12, 44

            7 April 15, 44

            8 April 15, 44

            9 April 17, 44

            10 April 19, 44

            11 April 21, 44

            12 April 22, 44

            13a April 22-25, 44

            13b April 26, 44

            13 April 26, 44

            14 April 27, 44

            15 May 1, 44

            16 May 3, 44

            17a May 3, 44

            17 May 4, 44

            19 May 8, 44

            18 May 9, 44

            20 May 11, 44

            21 May 11,44

            22 May 14, 44

        XV. 1 May 17, 44

            1a May 18, 44

            2 May 18, 44

            16a May 19 or 20, 44

            3 May 22, 44

            4 May 24, 44

            4a May 27, 44

            6 May 27, 44

            5 May 28, 44

            7 May 28 or 29, 44

            8 May 31, 44

            9 June 2, 44

            10 June 5 or 6, 44

            11 June 8, 44

            12 June 9 or 10, 44

            16 June 11 or 12, 44

            15 June 13, 44

            17 June 14, 44

            18 June 16, 44

        XV. 19 June 17-21, 44

            20 June 17-21, 44

            21 June 22, 44

            23 June 24 or 25, 44

            24 June 26, 44

            22 June 27, 44

            14 June 27, 44

            25 June 29, 44

            26 July 2, 44

            27 July 3, 44

            28 July 3, 44

       XVI. 16 July 3-6, 44

            16a July 3-6, 44

            16b July, 44

            16c July, 44

            16d July, 44

            16e July, 44

            16f July, 44

        XV. 29 July 5, 44

       XVI. 1 July 8, 44

            5 July 9, 44

            4 July 10, 44

            2 July 11, 44

            3 July 17, 44

            6 July 25, 44

            7 August 19, 44

        XV. 13 October 25, 44

       XVI. 8 November 2, 44

            9 November 4, 44

            11 November 5, 44

            12 November 6, 44

            10 November 8, 44

            13a November 10, 44

            13b November 11, 44

            13c November 11, 44

            14 November, 44

            15 Before December 9, 44

Footnote 348:

  In many cases the dates and order are only approximate and authorities
  differ about them. I have generally accepted the dates given in the
  Teubner edition.




                            INDEX OF NAMES.

           [_The references are to the pages of Latin text._]

 Academia, 130, 160

 Academica, 140;
   -ca quaestio 138;
   -cus 132, 392

 Accius, 374, 384

 Achaia, 116, 322

 Acidinus, 68

 Acilius Balbus (M'.), 12

 Acilius Glabrio (M'.), 42

 Aebutius, 374

 Aeculanum, 374

 Aegypta, 74, 114

 Aelius (M.), 360, 364

 Aelius Lamia, _see_ Lamia (L. Aelius)

 Aelius Tubero (L.), 142

 Aemilius Lepidus, _father of Regillus_, 52

 Aemilius Lepidus (M'.), 42

 Aemilius Lepidus (M.), 194, 200, 204, 216, 388

 Aemilius Paulus (L.), 226, 228

 Africa, 52, 176

 Africanus, _see_ Cornelius Scipio Africanus

 Agamemnon, 202, 268

 Ahala, _see_ Servilius Ahala

 Ἀκαδημικὴ (σύνταξις), 130, 134

 Alaudae (legio), 400

 Albanius (C.), 172

 Albianum (negotium), 272, 280

 Albinus, _see_ Postumius Albinus

 Albius Sabinus, 132

 Aledius, 8, 50, 52, 58, 60

 Alexander, _letter carrier_, 112

 Alexander Magnus, 82, 164

 Alexandrinae legiones, 330

 Alexio, 158, 292, 300, 302

 Alexis, 22, 420

 Ἀλφειός, 10

 Alsius, 210

 Ammonius, 336

 Amyntas, 20

 Anagnia, 400

 Anagninum (praedium), 2, 358;
   -ni, 408

 Andromenes, 156

 Annianus, 330

 Annius (_i.e._ Asinius Pollio), 222

 Antaeus, 198

 Antiates, 326

 Antiochia, 130, 140;
   ratio, 136;
   -ius, 158

 Antiochus, _philosopher_, 138, 140

 Antiochus, _slave_, 178

 Antisthenes, 80

 Antistius Vetus (C.), 232

 Antium, 38, 204, 320, 322, 324

 Antonius (C.), _brother of the triumvir_, 346

 Antonius (L.), _brother of the triumvir_, 280, 284, 298, 312, 326, 336,
    342

 Antonius (M.), _orator_, 140

 Antonius (M.), _the triumvir_, 36, 40, 220, 222, 224, 228, 236, 240,
    246, 250, 256, 258, 264, 276, 278, 280, 282, 284, 292, 294, 302,
    304, 308, 310, 312, 316, 326, 328, 342, 346, 348, 350, 354, 374,
    376, 394, 398, 400, 402, 404, 410, 416, 418, 422;
   _letter from_, 246;
   _letter to_, 250.
   _See also_ Cytherius

 Antro, 342

 Apella, 38

 Apollinares ludi, 380

 Apollo, 302

 Apollodorus, 50

 Appia via, 404, 414

 Appuleius, _estate agent_, 28, 32

 Appuleius (M.), _augur_, 26, 30, 32, 36

 Aquilia, 244, 264

 Aquinum, 404, 414

 Arabio, 342

 Arcanum (praedium), 404

 Archilochus, 406

 Ἀρχιμήδειον πρόβλημα, 8, 166

 Argiletum, 68

 Ariarathes, 110

 Ariobarzanes, 110

 Aristophanes, 16, 406

 Ἀριστοτέλειος, 140

 Aristoteles, 82, 166

 Aristoxenus, 174

 Arpinas insula, 24;
   iter, 404;
   (praedium), 300, 362;
   -ates, 336, 414, 416

 Arpinum, 90, 122, 202, 288, 296, 402

 Asia, 318, 324, 326

 Asiatica curatio, 322

 Asinius Pollio (C.), 4, 78, 82, 146, 222, 366

 Astura, 84, 94, 160, 180, 188, 220, 224, 236, 260, 278, 326, 328

 Ateius Capito (C.), 178, 180, 436, 442;
   _letter to_, 434, 440

 Athamas, 22

 Athenae, 50, 52, 68, 338, 390

 Athenodorus, 408, 420

 Atilius (M.), 282

 Atilius Regulus (A.), 408

 Atilius Serranus (Sex.), 12

 Attica _or_ Atticula, 2, 8, 18, 20, 24, 26, 30, 32, 50, 52, 56, 58, 60,
    66, 70, 74, 86, 94, 98, 128, 132, 134, 138, 148, 152, 164, 196, 206,
    212, 220, 262, 278, 284, 362, 364, 370, 380, 392, 398, 412

 Atticus, _see_ Pomponius Atticus

 Ἄτυπος (_i.e._ Balbus), 8

 Aurelius, 426

 Aurelius, _legate of Hirtius_, 232

 Aurelius Cotta (C.), 42, 138, 140, 196

 Aurelius Cotta (L.), 42, 50, 56

 Aurelius Cotta (M.), 48, 196

 Aventinum, 68

 Avius, 10, 114

 Axianus (M.), 364

 Axius (Q.), 2


 Babullius, 206

 Bacchus, 362

 Baebius, 198

 Baiae, 84, 214, 332

 Baiana negotia, 228

 Balbilius, 330

 Balbinus, 146

 Balbus, _see_ Cornelius Balbus

 Baliares, 4

 Barba, _see_ Cassius Barba

 Barea, 382

 Barnaeus, 274

 Bassus, _see_ Caecilius Bassus _and_ Lucilius Bassus

 Bibulus, _see_ Calpurnius Bibulus

 Blesamius, 380

 Brinniana auctio, 130;
   -nus fundus, 210

 Brinnius, 132

 Brundisium, 328, 348, 352, 374, 376, 382

 Brutus, _see_ Iunius Brutus

 Bucilianus, 342, 382

 Bursa, _see_ Munatius Plancus Bursa

 Buthrotia civitas, 438;
   res (_or_ causa), 236, 240, 334, 428;
   -um negotium, 264;
   -us ager, 428

 Buthrotii, 238, 256, 304, 306, 336, 344, 366, 372, 382, 428, 432, 434,
    436, 438

 Buthrotius (_sc._ Plancus), 366

 Buthrotum, 278, 280, 298, 326, 348, 368

 Byzantii, 228


 Caecilius Bassus (Q.), 232, 330

 Caecilius Metellus (L.), _consul_ 142 B.C., 12

 Caecilius Metellus (L.), _tribune_ 49 B.C., 146

 Caecina, 400

 Caeliani, 122

 Caelius, 10, 14, 112

 Caelius Rufus (M.), 176

 Caepio, _see_ Servilius Caepio

 Caerellia, 104, 148, 150, 276, 294, 360

 Caerellianum nomen, 104

 Caesar, _see_ Iulius Caesar

 Caesaris filius (_i.e._ Caesarion), 280

 Caesariana celeritas, 404

 Caesonius (M.), 22

 Caieta, 226

 Calatia, 400

 Calenus, 406

 Cales, 410

 Calpurnius Bibulus (M.), 68

 Calpurnius Piso (C.), 42

 Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus (L.), 358, 396, 398

 Calva, 302

 Calvena, _see_ Matius

 Calvus Athenodorus, _see_ Athenodorus

 Camillus, _see_ Furius Camillus

 Cana, 192

 Caninianum naufragium, 94

 Caninius Gallus, 330, 420

 Caninius Rebilus (C.), 76, 88

 Canus, _see_ Gellius Canus

 Capito, _see_ Ateius Capito

 Capitolina contio, 296;
   sessio, 254;
   -nus dies, 234

 Capitolium, 176, 234

 Capua, 264, 400, 402, 410

 Carfulenus (D.), 304

 Carneades, 50, 146

 Carrinas (T.), 178

 Carteia, 94, 348

 Casca, _see_ Servilius Casca

 Cascellius (A.), 360

 Casilinum, 400, 404

 Cassiani (horti), 44

 Cassii, 280

 Cassius Barba, 212

 Cassius Longinus (C.), 150, 264, 274, 282, 284, 310, 312, 314, 316,
    318, 322, 324, 326, 330, 346, 354, 366, 374, 380, 384, 392

 Cassius Longinus (L.), 218

 Castriciana mancipia, 64;
   -num negotium, 60

 Castricius, 60

 Catina, 410

 Cato, _see_ Porcius Cato

 Cato (_i.e. Cicero's book on Cato_), 10, 162, 200

 Cato maior (_i.e. the De Senectute_), 286

 Catulus, _see_ Lutatius Catulus

 Catulus (_i.e. Cicero's Academica, Book I_), 174

 Celer, _see_ Pilius Celer

 Censorinus, _see_ Marcius Censorinus

 Chremés, 16

 Chrysippus, 166, 230

 Cicero, _see_ Tullius Cicero

 Circeii, 38, 320

 Cispiana (negotia), 52

 Cispius, 176

 Claudius, 42

 Claudius Marcellus (C.), 302, 328, 330, 418, 426

 Claudius Marcellus (M.), 124, 126, 150

 Clodia, 46, 80, 88, 90, 92, 98, 104, 160, 168, 228

 Clodiani (horti), 104

 Clodius (L.), 64, 330

 Clodius (Sex.), 246, 248, 254, 276

 Clodius Hermogenes, 156

 Clodius Patavinus, 94

 Clodius Pulcher (P.), 250, 252

 Clodius Pulcher (P.), _the younger_, 248, 250

 Cluatius, 34, 70

 Cluviana (negotia), 230;
   -ni horti, 202, 260;
   -num, 236, 238, 390

 Cluvius (M.), 200, 202

 Cocceius, 26, 36, 40, 426

 Coponiana villa, 66

 Corcyra, 156, 390

 Corduba, 76

 Corfidius (L.), 196

 Corinthus, 116, 118, 178

 Cornelius (Cn.), 178

 Cornelius Balbus (L.), 4, 20, 24, 26, 40, 62, 94, 110, 138, 146, 150,
    176, 184, 198, 200, 202, 204, 210, 214, 220, 234, 238, 282, 284,
    300, 308, 310, 314, 316, 318, 380, 412;
   _See also_ Ἄτυπος

 Cornelius Balbus (L.), _son of the former_, 184, 208

 Cornelius Dolabella (P.), 14, 20, 78, 122, 124, 132, 144, 148, 166,
    168, 198, 204, 210, 214, 232, 258, 260, 264, 266, 268, 272, 276,
    278, 280, 282, 284, 286, 302, 308, 316, 324, 326, 332, 334, 344,
    346, 348, 380, 406, 420, 426;
   _letters to_, 266, 334.

 Cornelius Lentulus (Cn.), 178

 Cornelius Lentulus Crus (L.), 302

 Cornelius Lentulus Niger (L.), 18

 Cornelius Lentulus Spinther (P.), 86, 104, 120, 126, 238

 Cornelius Nepos, 388, 420

 Cornelius Scipio Africanus Aemilianus (P.), 406, 416

 Cornificia, 166

 Cornificius (Q.), 28, 32, 40, 166

 Corumbus, 220

 Cosanum (praedium), 362

 Cosianus, 364

 Cossinius (L.), 202

 Cotta, _see_ Aurelius Cotta

 Crassus, _see_ Licinius Crassus

 Craterus, 26, 30

 Crispus, 10, 114, 116

 Critonius, 146

 Cumae, 296

 Cumana regna, 260

 Cumanum (praedium), 74, 164, 170, 236, 262, 278, 296, 370

 Cupiennius (C.), 438;
   _letter to_, 438

 Curio, _see_ Scribonius Curio

 Curius (M'.), 378

 Curtilius, 224, 234

 Curtius Postumus (M.), 100, 122, 232, 234, 300

 Cusinius, 80, 88

 Cytherius, 354


 Damasippus, _see_ Licinius Damasippus

 Deiotarus, 216, 240, 276, 380

 Demea, 170

 Demetrius, 262

 Demonicus, 332

 Δημοσθένης, 296

 Dicaearchus, 170, 172, 174, 178

 Dida, 210

 Dio, 320

 Diocharinae epistulae, 198

 Dionysius, 112, 180

 Dolabella, _see_ Cornelius Dolabella

 Domitius Ahenobarbus (Cn.), 184, 206, 382

 Drusiani (horti), 54

 Drusus, _see_ Livius Drusus

 Dymaei, 368


 Egnatius (L.), 36, 64, 66, 198

 Egnatius (Q.), 246

 Egnatius Maximus, 180

 Ennius (M.), 362

 Epicureus, 50, 140, 186

 Epicurus, 24, 282

 Epirotica (nomina), 184;
   -cae litterae, 106

 Epirus, 158, 376, 380, 390

 Ἡρακλείδειον, 306, 328, 362, 376, 408, 412

 Ἑρμόδωρος, _see_ Hermodorus

 Eros, 18, 36, 44, 110, 130, 170, 210, 274, 336, 338, 342, 350, 368,
    370, 372, 376, 414, 426

 Eupolis, 16

 Eurotas, 318

 Eutrapelus, _see_ Volumnius Eutrapelus


 Faberiana (causa _or_ res), 86, 168;
   -num (nomen), 62, 66, 98, 168;
   negotium, 170

 Faberius (Q.), 44, 54, 104, 110, 112, 164, 168, 174, 176, 272, 330

 Fabius Maximus (Q.), 12

 Fadius (C.), 406

 Fadius (L.), 336, 342, 350

 Fadius Gallus (M.), 206, 208

 Fanniani libri, 12

 Fannius (C.), 12, 14, 416

 Favonius (M.), 322, 366

 Ficulensis (fundus), 70

 Figulus, _see_ Marcius Figulus

 Flaminius Flamma (T.), 104, 262, 266, 294, 300

 Flavius, 32

 Formianum (praedium), 226, 332;
   -ni, 366

 Frangones, 234

 Fufius Calenus (Q.), 304, 406

 Fulvia, 240

 Fulviaster, 94

 Fundi, 224

 Furius Camillus (C.), 116, 180

 Furius Philus (L.), 12


 Galba, _see_ Sulpicius Galba

 Galli, 230

 Gallia, 222, 232, 256

 Gallica bella, 222;
   -us tumultus, 216

 Gallus, _see_ Caninius _and_ Fadius Gallus

 Gamala, 50

 Gellius Canus (Q.), 172, 352

 Gellius Poplicola (L.), 42

 Germani, 232

 Glabrio (M'.), 42

 Graeceius, 316

 Graeci, 34, 132, 418;
   ludi, 384

 Graecia, 228, 244, 260, 274


 Hegesias, 14

 Heles, 396

 Heraclides, 140

 Herenniani coheredes, 116

 Hermodorus, 146

 Hermogenes, 54, 66

 Hermogenes (Clodius), _see_ Clodius Hermogenes

 Herodes, _agent for Atticus_, 364

 Herodes, _of Athens_, 262, 274, 340, 378

 Hesiodus, 128

 Hetereius, 210

 Hieras, 380

 Hilarus, _freedman of Cicero_, 74, 138

 Hilarus, _freedman of Libo_, 382

 Hippocrates, 424

 Hirtius (A.), 4, 70, 76, 82, 88, 92, 96, 98, 144, 184, 232, 238, 282,
    286, 292, 294, 302, 310, 312, 314, 316, 328, 354;
   _letter of_, 312

 Hispalis, 142

 Hispani, 230

 Hispania, 18, 48, 76, 222

 Hispaniensis res, 330

 Hordeonius (T.), 202

 Hortensius (Q.), _orator_, 14, 118, 134, 136, 140, 170, 174, 178

 Hortensius (Q.), _son of the last_, 10, 372

 Hostilius Tubulus (L.), 12

 Hydrus, 352, 386


 Isthmus, 176

 Italia, 324, 376, 390

 Iulia, 366

 Iulia lex, 326;
   -ae nonae, 368, 380

 Iulius Caesar (C.), _dictator_, 6, 16, 20, 42, 82, 88, 96, 98, 100,
    102, 104, 108, 110, 120, 124, 126, 132, 136, 138, 142, 148, 152,
    160, 162, 164, 172, 180, 184, 188, 196, 198, 202, 204, 210, 212,
    216, 218, 222, 224, 232, 234, 238, 240, 242, 244, 246, 248, 264,
    266, 276, 302, 382, 428, 430, 432, 434, 436, 438, 440

 Iulius Caesar (L.), 42, 264, 268, 308

 Iulius Caesar Octavius (_i.e._ Octavianus), 224, 234, 238, 240, 284,
    286, 298, 328, 400, 402, 410, 418

 Iulius Caesar Strabo Vopiscus (C.), 140

 Iunia, 228

 Iunius, 28

 Iunii Bruti, 254, 280, 328

 Iunius Brutus (D.), 242, 304, 312, 320, 322, 340, 366, 410

 Iunius Brutus (D.), _consul_ 510 B.C., 46

 Iunius Brutus (L.), 190

 Iunius Brutus (M.), _murderer of Caesar_, 12, 14, 26, 28, 30, 34, 40,
    42, 58, 62, 74, 78, 114, 116, 118, 120, 122, 126, 128, 130, 132,
    134, 136, 146, 150, 152, 154, 156, 158, 180, 182, 184, 186, 188,
    190, 192, 200, 206, 216, 218, 222, 226, 228, 230, 232, 236, 242,
    258, 260, 264, 268, 274, 276, 278, 280, 282, 288, 294, 296, 302,
    306, 308, 310, 312, 314, 318, 320, 322, 326, 330, 340, 342, 344,
    346, 348, 350, 354, 356, 358, 360, 362, 364, 368, 370, 372, 374,
    380, 382, 384, 386, 392, 396, 398, 402, 418

 Iunius Silanus (D.), 42

 Iuventius Laterensis, 32

 Iuventius Talna, 166, 388


 Καλλιπίδης, 128

 Karthago, 382

 Κῦρος, _a book by Antisthenes_, 80


 Labeo, 130

 Lacedaemon, 318

 Laco, 408

 Laelius Sapiens (C.), 12

 Laenas, _see_ Popilius Laenas

 Lamia (L. Aelius), 48, 62, 198, 252

 Lamiani (horti), 44

 Lanuvinum (praedium), 90, 210

 Lanuvium, 86, 94, 96, 160, 162, 180, 200, 220, 226, 232, 280, 284, 306,
    318, 342, 348

 Laterensis, _see_ Iuventius Laterensis

 Latina lingua, 106;
   -ni, 34

 Latinitas, 240

 Lentulus, _son of Dolabella and Tullia_, 60, 64

 Lentulus, _see also_ Cornelius Lentulus

 Leonides, 262, 274, 340

 Lepidianae feriae, 412

 Lepidus, _see_ Aemilius Lepidus

 Lepta, 184, 200, 206, 358, 424

 Leucopetra, 390, 392

 Liberalia, 234, 254

 Libo, _see_ Scribonius Libo

 Licinius Crassus (L.), 100, 140, 228

 Licinius Crassus (P.), 52

 Licinius Damasippus, 62, 68

 Licinius Lucullus (Cn.), 296

 Licinius Lucullus Ponticus (L.), 130, 134, 140, 176

 Licinius Lucullus (L.), _son of Ponticus_, 116, 278

 Licinius Lucullus (M.), 118

 Licinius Murena (L.), 42, 118, 210

 Ligariana (_oratio_), 128, 138, 142, 196

 Ligarii, 196

 Ligarius (T.), 196

 Ligus (L.), 50, 224

 Livius Drusus, 6, 44, 50, 66, 68, 76, 80, 82, 88, 92, 160

 Lollius (C.), 44

 Lucceius (Cn.), 386

 Lucilianus φαλλός, 406

 Lucilius (C.), 146

 Lucilius Bassus, 10

 Lucrinus (lacus), 260

 Luculli, 42

 Lucullus, _see_ Licinius Lucullus

 Lucullus (_i.e. the 2nd book of Cicero's Academica_), 174

 Lupercus, 10

 Lutatius Catulus (Q.) _consul_ 78 B.C., 42, 130, 134, 140

 Lutatius Catulus (Q.), _consul_ 102 B.C., 140


 Macedonicae legiones, 400

 Madarus (_i.e._ Matius), 218

 Magius Cilo (P.), 126

 Mamurra, 214

 Manilius (M'.), 12

 Manlius Torquatus, 32, 116, 122, 142, 144, 198, 202, 412

 Manlius Torquatus (L.), _consul_ 65 B.C., 42

 Manlius Torquatus (L.), _son of the last_, 140

 Marcellus, _see_ Claudius Marcellus

 Marcianus, _see_ Tullius Marcianus

 Marcius Censorinus, 234

 Marcius Censorinus (L.), 12

 Marcius Figulus (C.), 42

 Marcius Philippus (C.), 32, 34, 212, 214, 238, 240, 418

 Marius, (C.), 100

 Marius (C.), _impostor_, 100, 224, 226, 228

 Mars, 322

 Martius campus, 20, 180

 Massilienses, 256

 Matius (C.), 210, 220, 222, 300, 306.
   _See also_ Madarus

 Maximus, _see_ Fabius Maximus

 Menedemus, 298, 308, 346

 Menturnae, 404, 414

 Messalla, _see_ Valerius Messalla

 Metella, 120

 Metellus, _see_ Caecilius Metellus

 Meto, 104

 Meto, _astronomer_, 6

 Metrodorus, 298

 Mettius, 364

 Μίκυλλος, 212

 Μίμας, 414

 Misenum, 280, 292

 Montanus, _see_ Tullius Montanus

 Mucius Scaevola (P.), 12

 Mulvius pons, 180

 Mummius (L.), 114, 170, 178, 416

 Mummius (Sp.), _brother of L. Mummius_, 116, 118, 170

 Mummius (Sp.), _grandson of the last_, 118

 Munatius Plancus, 104, 176, 362, 366, 368, 374, 382, 426, 430, 432,
    436, 438, 440;
   _letters to_, 428, 432, 438

 Munatius Plancus Bursa (T.), 234

 Mundus, 362, 366

 Murcus, _see_ Statius Murcus

 Murena, _see_ Licinius Murena

 Musca, 82

 Mustela, 10, 92, 98, 114, 116, 120

 Mustela, _of Anagnium_, 408

 Myrtilus, 332, 410


 Narbo, 76

 Naso (P.), 32

 Neapolis, 234, 264, 268, 294, 380, 392

 Neapolitanum (praedium), 286

 Nemus, 308

 Nepos, _see_ Cornelius Nepos

 Nesis, 368, 374, 380

 Nestor, 268

 Nicasiones, 14

 Nicaea, 216

 Nicias Curtius, 56, 102, 106, 108, 122, 166, 214, 232, 348

 Nolanus (ager), 122


 Ocella (Cn.), 412

 Octavianus, _see_ Iulius Caesar Octavius

 Octavii pueri, 208

 Octavius, _see_ Iulius Caesar Octavius

 Offilius (A.), 184

 Ollius, 206

 Olympia, 170, 398

 Oppius (C.), 26, 40, 62, 94, 110, 138, 204, 210, 216, 310, 374, 376,
    422

 Ops, 256, 272, 420

 Orator, _a book by Cicero_, 16

 Oropus, 50

 Ostiense (praedium), 50, 62

 Otho, _see_ Roscius Otho

 Othones, 366

 Ovia, 44, 52, 64, 150, 372

 Ovius, 370


 Paciaecus, 4

 Pacorus, 232

 Paestanus sinus, 388

 Paetus, _see_ Papirius Paetus

 Παλλάς, 188

 Panaetius, 122, 408

 Pansa, _see_ Vibius Pansa

 Papirius Paetus (L.), 260

 Parilia, 252

 Parthenon, 190

 Parthi, 172;
   -us, 232

 Parthicum bellum, 162

 Patavinus, 94

 Patrae, 390

 Patulcianum nomen, 272

 Paulus, _see_ Aemilius Paulus (L.)

 Peducaeus (Sex.), 102, 108, 112, 314, 330, 406, 420, 424

 Πειρήνη, 10

 Pelopidae, 240, 324

 Pelops, 228

 Περσικὴ porticus, 318

 Φαῖδρος (Phaedrus), 188, 396

 Phamea, 206, 208

 Pharnaces, 170, 198

 Pheriones, 254

 Philippus, _see_ Marcius Philippus

 Philo, 382

 Philotimus, _copyist_, 176

 Philotimus, _freedman of Terentia_, 10, 94, 98

 Philoxenus, 122

 Philus, _see_ Furius Philus

 Pilia, 2, 8, 20, 30, 32, 52, 56, 58, 60, 66, 74. 86, 98, 152, 204, 206,
    220, 260, 262, 278, 284, 288, 296, 370, 380, 392, 398

 Pilius (M.), 172

 Pilius Celer (Q.), 20

 Pindarus, _poet_, 188

 Pindarus, _slave_, 370

 Piso, _banker_, 12, 110, 114, 116, 128, 130, 136, 178

 Piso, _see also_ Calpurnius _and_ Pupius Piso

 Plaetorius (M.), 342

 Plancus, _see_ Munatius Plancus

 Plato, 146

 Plotius, 202

 Polla, 154

 Pollex, 200, 202, 204, 206

 Pollio, _see_ Asinius Pollio

 Polybius, 170

 Pompeia lex, 208

 Pompeianum (praedium), 122, 260, 262, 264, 272, 274, 278, 280, 282,
    292, 332, 374, 380, 388, 396, 410

 Pompeius Magnus (Cn.), 22

 Pompeius (Cn.), _son of the last_, 4, 76

 Pompeius (Q.), 12

 Pompeius (Sex.), 76, 94, 216, 222, 230, 242, 288, 348, 352, 354, 368,
    380, 382

 Pomponius Atticus (T.), 6, 40, 48, 172, 186, 238, 260, 264, 280, 334,
    336, 338, 348, 372, 390, 394, 414, 424, 428, 430, 432, 434, 438, 440

 Pontianus, 92

 Pontius Aquila (L.), 286

 Popilius (P.), 174

 Popilius Laenas, 26, 28, 32

 Porcia, _daughter of Cato_, 322

 Porcia, _sister of Cato_, 184, 206

 Porcius Cato (M.) (_i.e. "Cato of Utica"_), 8, 42, 44, 82, 88, 92, 96,
    134, 140, 370, 392

 Porcius Cato (M.), _son of the last_, 116

 Posidonius, 408

 Postumia, 22, 48

 Postumius Albinus (A.). 170, 176

 Postumus, _see_ Curtius Postumus

 Praeneste, 4

 Preciana (negotia), 52

 Prognostica, _a work by Cicero_, 340

 Ψυρίη, 414

 Publicianus locus, 80

 Publilia, 66

 Publilius, 18, 38, 52, 60, 66, 182, 204, 276, 372, 390

 Publilius Syrus, 218

 Pupius Piso Frugi Calpurnianus (M.), 140

 Puteolana regna, 260;
   -num (praedium), 226, 278, 292, 294, 296, 364, 368;
   -nus mos, 254

 Puteoli, 198, 204, 210, 214, 348, 360, 362, 366, 418


 Quinctius Flamininus (T.), 12

 Quinctius Scapula (T.), 76, 80, 86

 Quinti (_sc._ Cicerones), 280

 Quirinus, 96, 166


 Regillus, 52

 Regini, 392

 Regium, 390

 Regulus, _see_ Atilius Regulus

 Roma, 14, 20, 22, 34, 46, 50, 68, 76, 84, 86, 90, 98, 102, 110, 120,
    130, 136, 148, 154, 156, 158, 162, 174, 184, 188, 196, 208, 212,
    220, 236, 240, 262, 280, 288, 302, 308, 310, 322, 324, 326, 338,
    350, 358, 370, 372, 392, 394, 400, 402, 404, 410, 412, 418

 Romani cives, 240; ludi, 198, 200;
   -nus populus, 254, 374

 Roscius Otho (L.), 76, 80, 82, 86, 90, 92, 168, 172, 176

 Rubriana, 406

 Rufio (Vestorianus), 254

 Rupilius (P.), 174

 Rutilia, 42, 46


 Sabinus, _see_ Albius Sabinus

 Sallustius (Cn.), 210

 Salus, 96

 Salvius, 198, 376

 Samnium, 280, 410

 Sara, 336

 Saserna, 300

 Saturnalia, 212, 214

 Satyrus, 48

 Saufeius (L.), 274, 306

 Saxa, 190

 Scaeva, 154

 Scaevae, 234

 Scaevola, _see_ Mucius Scaevola

 Scaptius (M.) 330

 Scapula, _see_ Quinctius Scapula

 Scapulani (horti), 76, 84, 104, 130, 180

 Scipio, _see_ Cornelius Scipio

 Scribonius Curius (C.), 42

 Scribonius Libo (L.), _tribune_, 56 B.C., 36, 40, 380, 382

 Scribonius Libo (L.), _writer of annals_, 12, 170, 174, 196

 Scrofa, _see_ Tremellius Scrofa

 Seius (M.), 22

 Sempronius Tuditanus (C.), 118

 Sempronius Tuditanus (C.), _son of the last_, 114, 170, 174, 178

 Septimia, 404

 Septimius (C.), 26

 Serranus, _see_ Atilius Serranus

 Servilia, _mother of Brutus_, 128, 136, 314, 322, 324, 326, 330, 342,
    356

 Servilia, _wife of Claudius_, 42

 Servilius Ahala (C.), 190

 Servilius Caepio (Cn.), _consul_ 141 B.C., 12

 Servilius Caepio (Cn.), 42

 Servilius Casca (P.), 196, 422, 424

 Servilius Vatia (P.), 42

 Servius, _see_ Sulpicius Rufus

 Sestius (P.), 110, 120, 208, 218, 332, 342, 362, 374, 382, 418

 Sextilianus fundus, 234

 Sextilius Rufus (C.), 224

 Sextus, _see_ Peducaeus _and_ Pompeius

 Sicca, 50, 52, 54, 56, 58, 64, 70, 276, 342, 388, 404, 406

 Sicilia, 60, 318

 Siculi, 238, 240

 Silanus, _see_ Iulius Silanus

 Siliana villa, 56;
   -ni (horti), 66;
   -num negotium, 56

 Silius, (A.), 38, 52, 54, 58, 62, 64, 66, 68, 70, 82, 88, 92, 104, 116,
    120, 210

 Silius Nerva (P.), 354, 356

 Sinuessanum (devorsoriolum), 228, 296, 298, 404, 414

 Siregius, 342

 Sittius (P.), 342

 Socrates, 230

 Socratici viri, 230

 Spintharus, 160

 Spinther, _see_ Cornelius Lentulus Spinther

 Staberius (Q.), 122

 Statilius (L.), 26, 28

 Statius, 10, 336, 340, 346, 352

 Statius Murcus (L.), 4

 Stoica, 140

 Strabo, _augur_, 32

 Strenia, 360

 Sulpicius Galba (Ser.), 12

 Sulpicius Rufus (P.), 140

 Sulpicius Rufus (Ser.), 22, 36, 124, 150, 276, 278, 314

 Syracusae, 390, 410

 Syrus, _slave_, 48, 342


 Talna, _see_ Iuventius Talna

 Tarentini, 390

 Tauromenium, 410

 Teanum Sidicinum, 410

 Tebassi, 234

 Tellus, 418

 Terentia, 36, 40, 42, 44, 46, 50, 76, 202, 390, 424, 426

 Terentius Varro (M.), 14, 128, 130, 134, 138, 140, 144, 148, 150, 154,
    156, 158, 160, 178, 182, 196, 310, 328, 332, 362, 406, 412

 Terentius Varro Gibba (M.), 206

 Tereus, _a play_, 374, 384

 Tertulla (Tertia), 280, 322

 Theophanes, 346

 Theopompus, 82, 120

 Tiberis, 38, 180, 338

 Tibur, 376

 Tigellius, 206, 210

 Tirenus pons, 414

 Tiro, _see_ Tullius Tiro

 Tisamenos, 22

 Tite, O (_i.e. the De Senectute_),376, 408

 Torquatus (_i.e. Cicero's De Finibus, Book I_), 174

 Torquatus, _see also_ Manlius Torquatus

 Transtiberini (horti), 50

 Trebatius Testa (C.), 122, 154

 Treboniani (horti), 92

 Trebonius (C.), 80, 88, 232

 Tremellius Scrofa (Cn.), 148

 Triarius, _see_ Valerius Triarius

 Τρῶες, 132, 156

 Tubero, _see_ Aelius Tubero

 Tubulus, _see_ Hostilius Tubulus

 Tuditanus, _see_ Sempronius Tuditanus

 Tullia (Tulliola), 2, 8, 14

 Tullianum caput, 360;
   semis 364;
   -nae aedes 360

 Tullii (_i.e._ Marcianus _and_ Montanus) 108

 Tullius, _scribe_, 152

 Tullius Cicero (M.), _the orator_, 218, 248, 268, 312, 314, 434

 Tullius Cicero (M.), _son of the orator_, 18, 20, 40, 52, 56, 58, 68,
    100, 104, 108, 156, 184, 226, 238, 244, 260, 262, 264, 280, 332,
    338, 340, 342, 350, 370, 378, 408, 424

 Tullius Cicero (Q.), _brother of the orator_, 2, 10, 60, 144, 192, 202,
    204, 212, 236, 244, 298, 350, 352, 358, 380

 Tullius Cicero (Q.), _son of the last_, 122, 168, 184, 244, 252, 264,
    294, 302, 346, 354, 366, 370, 378, 384

 Tullius Marcianus, 32, 106

 Tullius Montanus (L.), 104, 106, 262, 266, 274, 424;
   _see also_ Tullii

 Tullius Tiro (M.), 8, 14, 22, 40, 70, 98, 100, 102, 104, 122, 160, 308,
    316, 326, 338, 342, 344, 350, 388, 414, 426

 Tullus, _see_ Volcatius Tullus

 Tusculana disputatio, 300, 306;
   -num (praedium), 2, 6, 74, 86, 88, 90, 92, 94, 96, 98, 114, 120, 126,
      128, 130, 132, 136, 144, 154, 158, 168, 186, 204, 206, 214, 220,
      300, 306, 310, 312, 314, 316, 326, 334, 340, 342, 360, 362, 392,
      416, 418

 Tutia, 374

 Tyndaritani, 300

 Tyrannio, 6, 16


 Utica, 4


 Valerius, _friend of Cicero_, 392

 Valerius, _interpreter_, 410

 Valerius (P.), 102, 106, 134

 Valerius Messalla (M.), 124, 234, 342

 Valerius Messalla Corvinus (M.), 68, 428

 Valerius Triarius (C.), 60

 Varro, _see_ Terentius Varro

 Vaticani montes, 180;
   -nus campus 180

 Velia, 388, 396

 Vennonius, 6

 Ventidius (P.), 368

 Venuleia, 52

 Venusia, 386

 Vergilius, 102, 160, 176

 Verginius, 10

 Vescianum (praedium), 298

 Vestoriana haeresis, 254

 Vestorianus, _see_ Rufio

 Vestorius (C.), 120, 130, 170, 184, 200, 202, 210, 230, 242, 284, 286,
    306

 Vettienus, 8, 330, 332, 348

 Vettius (Sex.), 130

 Vetus, _see_ Antistius Vetus

 Vibius Pansa, 30, 32, 40, 58, 146, 238, 276, 282, 294, 328, 354, 370,
    402

 Vibo, 388

 Vibonensis sinus, 388

 Victor, 254

 Victoria, 196

 Visellia, 330

 Volaterranus Caecina, 400

 Volcatius Tullus (L.), 42

 Volcatius Tullus (L.), _praetor_, 46 B.C., 232

 Volumnius Eutrapelus, 316


 Xeno, 184, 262, 352, 370, 378

                      PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
                    RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED,
               BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, S.E. 1,
                          AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.
 2. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 3. Latin pages were on the left (even numbers) and English pages on the
    right (odd numbers) in the original. Here they are presented
    sequentially with thought breaks between and page numbers as
    indicated.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
 6. Enclosed overlined font in ¯macrons¯.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cicero: Letters to Atticus, Volume III
(of 3), by Marcus Tullius Cicero

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS, VOL 3 ***

***** This file should be named 51403-0.txt or 51403-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/4/0/51403/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, David Garcia and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Books project.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

